64
THEORY INTO PRACTICE / Spring 2002
Becoming a Self-Regulated Learner
Barry J. Zimmerman is Distinguished Professor at the
Graduate School and University Center of the City
University of New York.
I N AN ERA OF CONSTANT DISTRACTIONS in the form
 of portable phones, CD players, computers, and
televisions for even young children, it is hardly
surprising to discover that many students have not
learned to self-regulate their academic studying
very well. Consider the case of Tracy, a high school
student who is infatuated with MTV.
An important mid-term math exam is two
weeks away, and she has begun to study while
listening to popular music “to relax her.” Tracy
has not set any study goals for herself—instead
she simply tells herself to do as well as she can on
the test. She uses no specific learning strategies
for condensing and memorizing important material
and does not plan out her study time, so she ends up
cramming for a few hours before the test. She has
only vague self-evaluative standards and cannot gauge
her academic preparation accurately. Tracy attributes
her learning difficulties to an inherent lack of mathematical ability and is very defensive about her poor
study methods. However, she does not ask for help
from others because she is afraid of “looking stupid,” or seek out supplementary materials from the
library because she “already has too much to learn.”
She finds studying to be anxiety-provoking, has little
self-confidence in achieving success, and sees little
intrinsic value in acquiring mathematical skill.
Self-regulation researchers have sought to
understand students like Tracy and to provide help
in developing key processes that she lacks, such as
goal setting, time management, learning strategies,
self-evaluation, self-attributions, seeking help or
information, and important self-motivational beliefs,
such as self-efficacy and intrinsic task interest.
In recent years, there have been exciting discoveries regarding the nature, origins, and development of how students regulate their own learning
processes (Zimmerman & Schunk, 2001). Although
these studies have clearly revealed how self-regulatory processes lead to success in school, few
teachers currently prepare students to learn on their
own. In this article, I discuss students’ self-regulation as a way to compensate for their individual
differences in learning, define the essential qualities of academic self-regulation, describe the structure and function of self-regulatory processes, and,
finally, give an overview of methods for guiding
students to learn on their own.
Changing Conceptions of
Individual Differences
Since the beginning of public schooling in
the United States, educators have wrestled with
the presence of substantial differences in individual students’ backgrounds and modes of learning.
Some students grasped important concepts easily
and seemed highly motivated to study, whereas
Barry J. Zimmerman
Becoming a Self-Regulated
Learner: An Overview
THEORY INTO PRACTICE, Volume 41, Number 2, Spring 2002
Copyright © 2002 College of Education, The Ohio State University
 65
Becoming a Self-Regulated Learner
Zimmerman
others struggled to understand and retain information and often seemed disinterested. In the 19th
century, learning was viewed as a formal discipline, and a student’s failure to learn was widely
attributed to personal limitations in intelligence or
diligence. Students were expected to overcome their
individual limitations in order to profit from the
curriculum of the school. Conceptions of self-regulatory development at the time were limited to
acquiring desirable personal habits, such as proper
diction and handwriting.
At the dawn of the 20th century, psychology
emerged as a science, and the topic of individual
differences in educational functioning attracted
widespread interest. Diverse reformers, such as
John Dewey, E.L. Thorndike, Maria Montessori,
and the progressive educators, suggested various
ways to alter the curriculum to accommodate students’ individual differences, such as grouping of
students homogeneously according to age or ability,
introducing perceptual-motor learning tasks, and
broadening course work to include training in practical skills. Later reformers matched instructional treatments to students’ aptitude or attitude scores on
standardized tests (Cronbach, 1957). Despite these
notable efforts, critics charged that the curriculum
of American schools remained too narrow and inflexible to accommodate the psychological needs
of all students. Many psychologists and educators
discussed the adverse effects of a rigid curriculum
on students’ self-images (ASCD Yearbook, 1962).
During the late 1970s and early 1980s, a new
perspective on students’ individual differences began to emerge from research on metacognition and
social cognition. Metacognition is defined as the
awareness of and knowledge about one’s own
thinking. Students’ deficiencies in learning were
attributed to a lack of metacognitive awareness of
personal limitations and an inability to compensate. Social cognitive researchers were interested
in social influences on children’s development of
self-regulation, and they studied issues such as the
effects of teacher modeling and instruction on students’ goal setting and self-monitoring (Schunk,
1989; Zimmerman, 1989). Students were asked to
set particular types of goals for themselves, such
as completing of a certain number of math homework problems, and to self-record their effectiveness
in achieving these goals. Students who set specific
and proximal goals for themselves displayed superior achievement and perceptions of personal efficacy. Interestingly, simply asking students to
self-record some aspect of their learning, such as
the completion of assignments, often led to “spontaneous” improvements in functioning (Shapiro,
1984). These effects, termed reactivity in the scientific literature, implied that students’ metacognitive (i.e., self) awareness of particular aspects of
their functioning could enhance their self-control.
Of course, self-awareness is often insufficient when
a learner lacks fundamental skills, but it can produce a readiness that is essential for personal
change (Zimmerman, 2001).
These and related results led researchers to
attribute individual differences in learning to students’ lack of self-regulation. This perspective focused instead on what students needed to know
about themselves in order to manage their limitations during efforts to learn, such as a dyslexic
student’s knowing to use a particular strategy to
read. Although teachers also need to know a student’s strengths and limitations in learning, their
goal should be to empower their students to become self-aware of these differences. If a student
fails to understand some aspect of a lesson in class,
he or she must possess the self-awareness and strategic knowledge to take corrective action. Even if
it were possible for teachers to accommodate every student’s limitation at any point during the
school day, their assistance could undermine the
most important aspect of this learning—a student’s
development of a capability to self-regulate.
Defining Self-Regulated Learning
in Process Terms
Self-regulation is not a mental ability or an
academic performance skill; rather it is the selfdirective process by which learners transform their
mental abilities into academic skills. Learning is
viewed as an activity that students do for themselves in a proactive way rather than as a covert
event that happens to them in reaction to teaching.
Self-regulation refers to self-generated thoughts,
feelings, and behaviors that are oriented to attaining goals (Zimmerman, 2000). These learners are
proactive in their efforts to learn because they are
66
THEORY INTO PRACTICE / Spring 2002
Becoming a Self-Regulated Learner
aware of their strengths and limitations and because they are guided by personally set goals and
task-related strategies, such as using an arithmetic
addition strategy to check the accuracy of solutions to subtraction problems. These learners monitor their behavior in terms of their goals and
self-reflect on their increasing effectiveness. This
enhances their self-satisfaction and motivation to
continue to improve their methods of learning.
Because of their superior motivation and adaptive
learning methods, self-regulated students are not
only more likely to succeed academically but to
view their futures optimistically.
Self-regulation is important because a major
function of education is the development of lifelong learning skills. After graduation from high
school or college, young adults must learn many
important skills informally. For example, in business settings, they are often expected to learn a
new position, such as selling a product, by observing proficient others and by practicing on their own.
Those who develop high levels of skill position
themselves for bonuses, early promotion, or more
attractive jobs. In self-employment settings, both
young and old must constantly self-refine their
skills in order to survive. Their capability to selfregulate is especially challenged when they undertake long-term creative projects, such as works of
art, literary texts, or inventions. In recreational settings, learners spend much personally regulated
time learning diverse skills for self-entertainment,
ranging from hobbies to sports.
Although the relationship of self-reliance to
success in life has been widely recognized, most students struggle to attain self-discipline in their methods of study today as they did a century ago. What
does contemporary research tell us about this desirable but elusive personal quality? First, self-regulation of learning involves more than detailed
knowledge of a skill; it involves the self-awareness,
self-motivation, and behavioral skill to implement that
knowledge appropriately. For example, there is evidence (Cleary & Zimmerman, 2000) that experts differ from non-experts in their application of knowledge
at crucial times during learning performances, such
as correcting specific deficiencies in technique.
Second, contemporary research tells us that
self-regulation of learning is not a single personal
trait that individual students either possess or lack.
Instead, it involves the selective use of specific
processes that must be personally adapted to each
learning task. The component skills include: (a)
setting specific proximal goals for oneself, (b)
adopting powerful strategies for attaining the goals,
(c) monitoring one’s performance selectively for
signs of progress, (d) restructuring one’s physical
and social context to make it compatible with one’s
goals, (e) managing one’s time use efficiently, (f)
self-evaluating one’s methods, (g) attributing causation to results, and (h) adapting future methods.
A students’ level of learning has been found to
vary based on the presence or absence of these key
self-regulatory processes (Schunk & Zimmerman,
1994; 1998).
Third, contemporary research reveals that the
self-motivated quality of self-regulated learners
depends on several underlying beliefs, including
perceived efficacy and intrinsic interest. Historically, educators have focused on social encouragement and extrinsic “bells and whistles” to try to
elevate students’ level of motivation. Unfortunately,
self-directed studying or practicing was often derided as inherently boring, repetitive, and mind numbing with catchy phrases such as “Drill and kill.”
However, interviews with experts reveal a very different picture of these experiences (Ericsson &
Charness, 1994). Experts spend approximately four
hours each day in study and practice and find these
activities highly motivating. They vary their methods of study and practice in order to discover new
strategies for self-improvement. With such diverse
skills as chess, sports, and music, the quantity of an
individual’s studying and practicing is a strong predictor of his or her level of expertise. There is also
evidence that the quality of practicing and studying episodes is highly predictive of a learner’s level
of skill (Zimmerman & Kitsantas, 1997; 1999).
However, few beginners in a new discipline
immediately derive powerful self-motivational benefits, and they may easily lose interest if they are
not socially encouraged and guided, as most music
teachers will readily attest (McPherson & Zimmerman, in press). Fortunately, the motivation of novices can be greatly enhanced when and if they use
high-quality self-regulatory processes, such as close
self-monitoring. Students who have the capabilities
 67
Becoming a Self-Regulated Learner
Zimmerman
to detect subtle progress in learning will increase
their levels of self-satisfaction and their beliefs in
their personal efficacy to perform at a high level
of skill (Schunk, 1983). Clearly, their motivation
does not stem from the task itself, but rather from
their use of self-regulatory processes, such as selfmonitoring, and the effects of these processes on
their self-beliefs.
Structure and Function of
Self-Regulatory Processes
This brings us to the essential question of how
does a student’s use of specific learning processes,
level of self-awareness, and motivational beliefs
combine to produce self-regulated learners? Social
learning psychologists view the structure of selfregulatory processes in terms of three cyclical phases. The forethought phase refers to processes and
beliefs that occur before efforts to learn; the performance phase refers to processes that occur during behavioral implementation, and self-reflection
refers to processes that occur after each learning
effort. The processes that have been studied in each
phase to date are shown in Figure 1, and the function of each process will be described next (Zimmerman, 2000).
Forethought phase
There are two major classes of forethought
phase processes: task analysis and self-motivation.
Figure 1. Phases and Subprocesses of Self-Regulation. From B.J. Zimmerman and M. Campillo (in press), “Motivating
Self-Regulated Problem Solvers.” In J.E. Davidson and Robert Sternberg (Eds.), The Nature of Problem Solving. New
York: Cambridge University Press. Adapted with permission.
Performance Phase
Self-Control
Imagery
Self-instruction
Attention focusing
Task strategies
Self-Observation
Self-recording
Self-experimentation
Self-Reflection Phase
Self-Judgment
Self-evaluation
Causal attribution
Self-Reaction
Self-satisfaction/affect
Adaptive/defensive
Forethought Phase
Task Analysis
Goal setting
Strategic planning
Self-Motivation Beliefs
Self-efficacy
Outcome expectations
Intrinsic interest/value
Learning goal orientation
Self-efficacy
Outcome expectations
Intrinsic interest/value
Learning goal orientation
Goal setting
Strategic planning
Self-evaluation
Causal attribution
Self-satisfaction/affect
Adaptive/defensive
68
THEORY INTO PRACTICE / Spring 2002
Becoming a Self-Regulated Learner
Task analysis involves goal setting and strategic
planning. There is considerable evidence of increased academic success by learners who set specific proximal goals for themselves, such as
memorizing a word list for a spelling test, and by
learners who plan to use spelling strategies, such
as segmenting words into syllables.
Self-motivation stems from students’ beliefs
about learning, such as self-efficacy beliefs about
having the personal capability to learn and outcome expectations about personal consequences of
learning (Bandura, 1997). For example, students
who feel self-efficacious about learning to divide
fractions and expect to use this knowledge to pass
a college entrance exam are more motivated to learn
in a self-regulated fashion. Intrinsic interest refers
to the students’ valuing of the task skill for its
own merits, and learning goal orientation refers to
valuing the process of learning for its own merits.
Students who find the subject matter of history,
for example, interesting and enjoy increasing their
mastery of it are more motivated to learn in a selfregulated fashion.
Performance phase
Performance phase processes fall into two
major classes: self-control and self-observation.
Self-control refers to the deployment of specific
methods or strategies that were selected during the
forethought phase. Among the key types of selfcontrol methods that have been studied to date are
the use of imagery, self-instruction, attention focusing, and task strategies. For example, in learning the
Spanish word pan for “bread,” an English-speaking
girl could form an image of a bread pan or selfinstruct using the phrase “bread pan.” She could also
locate her place of study away from distracting noises so she could control her attention better. For a
task-strategy, she could group the Spanish word pan
with associated words for foods.
Self-observation refers to self-recording personal events or self-experimentation to find out
the cause of these events. For example, students
are often asked to self-record their time use to
make them aware of how much time they spend
studying. A boy may notice that when he studied
alone, he finished his homework more quickly than
when studying with a friend. To test this hypothesis,
the boy could conduct a self-experiment in which
he studied parallel lessons alone and in the presence of his friend to see whether his friend was an
asset or a liability. Self-monitoring, a covert form of
self-observation, refers to one’s cognitive tracking of
personal functioning, such as the frequency of failing to capitalize words when writing an essay.
Self-reflection phase
There are two major classes of self-reflection phase processes: self-judgment and self-reaction. One form of self-judgment, self-evaluation,
refers to comparisons of self-observed performances against some standard, such as one’s prior performance, another person’s performance, or an
absolute standard of performance. Another form
of self-judgment involves causal attribution, which
refers to beliefs about the cause of one’s errors or
successes, such as a score on a mathematics test.
Attributing a poor score to limitations in fixed ability can be very damaging motivationally because
it implies that efforts to improve on a future test
will not be effective. In contrast, attributing a poor
math score to controllable processes, such as the
use of the wrong solution strategy, will sustain motivation because it implies that a different strategy
may lead to success.
One form of self-reaction involves feelings
of self-satisfaction and positive affect regarding
one’s performance. Increases in self-satisfaction
enhance motivation, whereas decreases in self-satisfaction undermine further efforts to learn (Schunk,
2001). Self-reactions also take the form of adaptive/defensive responses. Defensive reactions refer
to efforts to protect one’s self-image by withdrawing or avoiding opportunities to learn and perform,
such as dropping a course or being absent for a
test. In contrast, adaptive reactions refer to adjustments designed to increase the effectiveness of
one’s method of learning, such as discarding or
modifying an ineffective learning strategy.
This view of self-regulation is cyclical in that
self-reflections from prior efforts to learn affect subsequent forethought processes (e.g., self-dissatisfaction will lead to lower levels of self-efficacy and
diminished effort during subsequent learning) (Zimmerman & Bandura, 1994). In support of this cyclical view of self-regulation, high correlations were
 69
Becoming a Self-Regulated Learner
Zimmerman
found among learners’ use of forethought, performance, and self-reflection phase processes (Zimmerman & Kitsantas, 1999). For example, students who
set specific proximal goals are more likely to selfobserve their performance in theses areas, more likely to achieve in the target area, and will display higher
levels of self-efficacy than students who do not set
goals (Bandura & Schunk, 1981). Other studies have
revealed that experts display significantly higher levels of self-regulatory processes during practice efforts than novices (Cleary & Zimmerman, 2000).
The self-regulation profile of novices is very
distinctive from that of experts. Novices fail to engage in high-quality forethought and instead attempt
to self-regulate their learning reactively. That is, they
fail to set specific goals or to self-monitor systematically, and as a result, they tend to rely on comparisons with the performance of others to judge their
learning effectiveness. Because typically other learners are also progressing, their performance represents
a constantly increasing criterion of success that is
very difficult to surpass. Furthermore, learners who
make comparative self-evaluations are prompted to
attribute causation to ability deficiencies (which are
also normative in nature), and this will produce lower personal satisfaction and prompt defensive reactions. In contrast, the self-regulation profile of
experts reveals they display high levels of selfmotivation and set hierarchical goals for themselves
with process goals leading to outcome goals in succession, such as dividing a formal essay into an
introduction, a body, and a conclusion. Experts plan
learning efforts using powerful strategies and selfobserve their effects, such as a visual organizer for
filling in key information (Zimmerman & Risemberg, 1997). They self-evaluate their performance
against their personal goals rather than other learners’ performance, and they make strategy (or method) attributions instead of ability attributions. This
leads to greater personal satisfaction with their learning progress and further efforts to improve their performance. Together these self-reactions enhance
various self-motivational beliefs of experts, such
as self-efficacy, outcome expectations, learning
goal orientation, and intrinsic interest.
Knowing the differences in the structure and
function of self-regulatory processes between experts
and novices has enabled researchers to formulate
intervention programs in schools for children who
display lower levels of self-regulatory development
(Schunk & Zimmerman, 1998).
Teaching Students to Become
Self-Regulated Learners
Research on the quality and quantity of students’ use of self-regulatory processes has revealed
high correlations with academic achievement track
placement as well as with performance on standardized test scores (Zimmerman & Martinez-Pons,
1986). There is also evidence that students’ use of
self-regulatory processes is distinctive from but
correlated with general measures of ability, such
as verbal ability (Zimmerman & Bandura, 1994).
Although many self-regulatory processes, such as
goal setting and self-monitoring, are generally covert, teachers are aware of many overt manifestations of these processes, such as students’
self-awareness of the quality of their work and preparedness in class (Zimmerman & Martinez-Pons,
1988). Recent research shows that self-regulatory
processes are teachable and can lead to increases
in students’ motivation and achievement (Schunk
& Zimmerman, 1998).
Although research findings strongly support
the importance of students’ use of self-regulatory
processes, few teachers effectively prepare students
to learn on their own (Zimmerman, Bonner, &
Kovach, 1996). Students are seldom given choices
regarding academic tasks to pursue, methods for
carrying out complex assignments, or study partners. Few teachers encourage students to establish
specific goals for their academic work or teach
explicit study strategies. Also, students are rarely
asked to self-evaluate their work or estimate their
competence on new tasks. Teachers seldom assess
students’ beliefs about learning, such as self-efficacy perceptions or causal attributions, in order to
identify cognitive or motivational difficulties before they become problematic.
Contrary to a commonly held belief, self-regulated learning is not asocial in nature and origin.
Each self-regulatory process or belief, such as goal
setting, strategy use, and self-evaluation, can be
learned from instruction and modeling by parents,
teachers, coaches, and peers. In fact, self-regulated students seek out help from others to improve
70
THEORY INTO PRACTICE / Spring 2002
Becoming a Self-Regulated Learner
their learning. What defines them as “self-regulated”
is not their reliance on socially isolated methods of
learning, but rather their personal initiative, perseverance, and adoptive skill. Self-regulated students
focus on how they activate, alter, and sustain specific
learning practices in social as well as solitary contexts. In an era when these essential qualities for lifelong learning are distressingly absent in many
students, teaching self-regulated learning processes
is especially relevant.
Note
1. Correspondence concerning this article should be directed to Barry J. Zimmerman, Ph.D. Program in
Educational Psychology, Graduate School and University Center of the City University of New York,
365 Fifth Ave., New York, NY 10016-4309 or
bzimmerman@gc.cuny.edu.