Introduction to Learning Techniques

Tell me what you think of this,

what I always call, protocol,

if I want to learn something

from a manuscript I read or a book chapter,

I used to highlight things.

And I had a very elaborate,

extracted from my university days,

system of stars and exclamation marks and underline

that mean a lot to me,

that, yes, bring me back to a given segment

within the chapter.

But a few years ago,

I was teaching a course

in the biology department at Stanford,

and for some reason,

we had them read a study about information retention.

And I learned from that study

that one of the best things we can do

is read information, in whatever form,

a magazine, research article, et cetera, a book,

and then to take some time away from that material,

maybe walk,

maybe close one's eyes,

maybe leave them open, doesn't matter,

and just try and remember specific elements.

How much does one remember?

Then go back to the material and look at it.

And I've just been positively astonished

at how much more information I can learn

when I'm not simply going through motor commands

of just underlining things and highlighting them,

but stepping away and thinking,

"Okay, yeah, oh, I don't remember

how many subjects there were.

I'll go back and check that,

maybe make a note.

And okay, they did this,

then they did that, and then,"

and then it's crystallized.

And as I say this, I realize,

of course this should work,

[laughing] this is the way that the brain learns.

But somehow, that's not the way

we are taught to learn.
Discovering the Power of Active Recall

Yeah, well, I'm smiling because when I was 22,

I wrote this book

called "How to Become a Straight-A Student," right?

And the whole premise of the book was,

"I'm going to talk to actual college students

who have straight A's

and who don't seem completely ground out, right?

Like, not burnt out.

And I'm just going to interview 'em, right?"

And the protocol was,

"How did you study for the last test that you studied for?

How did you take notes for the last?"

So I was just asking them

to walk through their methodology.

The core idea of that book

was active recall.

That was the core idea,

that replicating ideas, what I used to say is,

"Replicating the information from scratch

as if teaching a class without looking at your notes."

That is the only way to learn.

And the thing about it was,

it's a trade off.

it's efficient, doesn't take much time,

but it's incredibly mentally taxing, right?

This is why students often avoid it.

It is difficult to sit there

and try to replicate and pull forth,

"Okay, what did I read here?

How did that work?"

It's mentally very taxing,

but it's very time efficient, right?

If you're willing to essentially put up with that,

with that pain,

you learn very quickly.

And not only do you learn very quickly,

you don't forget.

It's almost like you have a pseudo-photographic memory

when you study this way.

You sit down to do a test

and you're replicating whole lines [laughing]

from what you studied,

the ideas sort of come out fully formed

because it's such a fantastic way to actually learn.
The Journey to Academic Excellence

It was my key, the whole premise

that got me writing that book

is I went through this period

as a college student

where I came in freshman year,

was a fine student,

not a great student, but a fine student.

I was rowing crew and I was sort of excited to do that.

And then I developed a heart condition,

and had to stop.

Congenital wiring in the heart,

atrial flutter thing.

It meant I couldn't row crew anymore.

So a prolapse of some sort?

It was a circuitry issue

that would lead to a extremely rapid heartbeat.

It's like really rapid,

like tachycardia, right?

You get 200-250 beats a minute just,

and it could be exercise induced, right?

Which is not optimal,

you could take beta blockers,

which would moderate the electrical timing,

but beta blockers reduce your max heart rate.

And if you're a athlete

where the entire thing that matters

is your max heart rate,

so you're doing something like a 2,000-meter rows,

your performance on beta blockers just goes down.

It makes no sense, it's like being a basketball player

that wears weighted shoes,

it's too frustrating.

Right, and it also makes you super mellow.

I was a pretty mellow guy.

[both laughing]

But I was a worst rower.

So I stopped that, and I was like,

"Okay, I want to get serious about my studies."

I said, "I can get serious about my studies

and writing," right?

That's when I actually made the decisions

that I then stuck with for the next 25 years after that.

But one of the things I did to get serious about my studies

is I said, "I'm going to systematically experiment

with how to study for tests

and how to write papers."

And I would try this, "How did it go?"

deconstruct experiment.

Try this, "How'd it go?"

deconstruct experiment.

And active recall was the thing

that turned me all around.

And so I went from a pretty good student

to 4.0 every single quarter,

Sophomore year, junior year, senior year.

I got one A minus

[laughing] between my sophomore year through my senior year.

It was like this miraculous transformation.

It was active recall.

I rebuilt all of my studying,

so if it was for a humanities class,

I had a whole way of taking notes

that was all built around doing active recall.

For math classes,

my main study tool was a stack of white paper.

"All right, do this proof,"

white piece of paper,

and just, "Can I do it from scratch?"

If I could, I know that technique.

If I don't, "All right, I'm going to come back

and try it again later."`

Completely transformed.

I did so well academically,

that's why I ended up writing that book

that basically spread that message to other people.
Mastering Material with Active Recall

So I'm a huge advocate for active recall.

It's really hard,

but it is the way to learn new things.

And as you pointed out,

it is very time efficient.

Oh yeah. Yeah.

, it was a problem,

it was a social problem for me

that I would have to pretend

[laughing] during finals period

that I was going to the library to study

because I would be done studying.

This active recall, it's brutal,

but it's incredibly efficient.

You sit down there,

I would have my cards

and I would mark it,

"Okay, I struggled with this,"

I'd put it in this pile,

"I got it done," I'd put it in this pile.

And so then you would just go back to the,

"I struggled with it," pile,

and work on that.

And then make a new, "I struggled with it," pile.

And these would exponentially decay.

And so in a few hours, you could really master,

with a few other tricks that worked,

you could really master the material pretty quickly.

And then, what am I supposed to do?

I didn't do all-nighters.

It wouldn't make any sense.

Active recall is how you prepare,

and it's going to take four hours

and it's going to be tough,

so do it in the morning when you have energy,

and then you're done.

I love it.
Applying Active Recall in Neuroanatomy

I learned essentially all of neuroanatomy

looking down the microscope at tissue samples.

And then I would try and take photographs with my eyes,

I do not have a photographic memory.

But then I would get home in the evening,

look through the neuroanatomy textbook,

lie down,

and try and fly through the different circuits in my mind.

And then if I arrived at a structure in the brain

that I couldn't identify,

I would then go check my notes

and go back. Ah, that's perfect.

So basically, I learned neuroanatomy,

which I'm poor at a great many things in life,

but neuroanatomy, I'm solid at,

and then some, if I may say so.

And it's because there's a mental map,

and you can kind of move through it,

fly through it dynamically.
Closing Remarks and Invitation to Watch Full Episode

Thank you for tuning into the Huberman Lab Clips channel.

If you enjoyed the clip that you just viewed,

please check out the full-length episode

by clicking here.