EFFECTIVE STUDENT LEARNING TECHNIQUES
1. Elaborative interrogation - Generating an explanation for why an explicitly stated fact
or concept is true
2. Self-explanation - Explaining how new information is related to known information,
or explaining steps taken during problem solving
3. Practice testing -Self-testing or taking practice tests over to-be-learned material
4. Distributed practice - Implementing a schedule of practice that spreads out study
activities over time
5. Interleaved practice - Implementing a schedule of practice that mixes different kinds
of problems, or a schedule of study that mixes different kinds of material, within a
single study session
6. Summarization - Writing summaries (of various lengths) of to-be-learned texts
7. Highlighting/underlining - Marking potentially important portions of to-be-learned
materials while reading
8. Keyword mnemonic - Using keywords and mental imagery to associate verbal
materials
9. Imagery for text - Attempting to form mental images of text materials while reading
or listening
10. Rereading - Restudying text material again after an initial reading
FROM: Dunlosky, J., Rawson, K.A., Marsh, E.J., Nathan, M.J., and Willingham, D.T. (2013). Improving
students’ learning with effective learning techniques: Promising directions from cognitive and
educational psychology. Psychological Science in the Public Interest 4(1) 4–58.
Dennis Parker
(916) 240-0133
dp1018@pacbell.net 
Psychological Science in the
Public Interest
14(1) 4–58
© The Author(s) 2013
Reprints and permission:
sagepub.com/journalsPermissions.nav
DOI: 10.1177/1529100612453266

Corresponding Author:
John Dunlosky, Psychology, Kent State University, Kent, OH 44242
E-mail: jdunlosk@kent.edu
Improving Students’ Learning With
Effective Learning Techniques: Promising
Directions From Cognitive and
Educational Psychology
John Dunlosky1
, Katherine A. Rawson1
, Elizabeth J. Marsh2
,
Mitchell J. Nathan3
, and Daniel T. Willingham4
1
Department of Psychology, Kent State University; 2
Department of Psychology and Neuroscience, Duke University; 3
Department of Educational Psychology, Department of Curriculum & Instruction, and Department of Psychology,
University of Wisconsin–Madison; and 4
Department of Psychology, University of Virginia
Summary
Many students are being left behind by an educational system that some people believe is in crisis. Improving educational
outcomes will require efforts on many fronts, but a central premise of this monograph is that one part of a solution involves
helping students to better regulate their learning through the use of effective learning techniques. Fortunately, cognitive and
educational psychologists have been developing and evaluating easy-to-use learning techniques that could help students achieve
their learning goals. In this monograph, we discuss 10 learning techniques in detail and offer recommendations about their
relative utility. We selected techniques that were expected to be relatively easy to use and hence could be adopted by many
students. Also, some techniques (e.g., highlighting and rereading) were selected because students report relying heavily on
them, which makes it especially important to examine how well they work. The techniques include elaborative interrogation,
self-explanation, summarization, highlighting (or underlining), the keyword mnemonic, imagery use for text learning, rereading,
practice testing, distributed practice, and interleaved practice.
To offer recommendations about the relative utility of these techniques, we evaluated whether their benefits generalize
across four categories of variables: learning conditions, student characteristics, materials, and criterion tasks. Learning conditions
include aspects of the learning environment in which the technique is implemented, such as whether a student studies alone
or with a group. Student characteristics include variables such as age, ability, and level of prior knowledge. Materials vary from
simple concepts to mathematical problems to complicated science texts. Criterion tasks include different outcome measures
that are relevant to student achievement, such as those tapping memory, problem solving, and comprehension.
We attempted to provide thorough reviews for each technique, so this monograph is rather lengthy. However, we also wrote
the monograph in a modular fashion, so it is easy to use. In particular, each review is divided into the following sections:
1. General description of the technique and why it should work
2. How general are the effects of this technique?
2a. Learning conditions
2b. Student characteristics
2c. Materials
2d. Criterion tasks
3. Effects in representative educational contexts
4. Issues for implementation
5. Overall assessment
Improving Student Achievement 5
Introduction
If simple techniques were available that teachers and students
could use to improve student learning and achievement, would
you be surprised if teachers were not being told about these
techniques and if many students were not using them? What if
students were instead adopting ineffective learning techniques
that undermined their achievement, or at least did not improve
it? Shouldn’t they stop using these techniques and begin using
ones that are effective? Psychologists have been developing
and evaluating the efficacy of techniques for study and instruction for more than 100 years. Nevertheless, some effective
techniques are underutilized—many teachers do not learn
about them, and hence many students do not use them, despite
evidence suggesting that the techniques could benefit student
achievement with little added effort. Also, some learning techniques that are popular and often used by students are relatively ineffective. One potential reason for the disconnect
between research on the efficacy of learning techniques and
their use in educational practice is that because so many techniques are available, it would be challenging for educators to
sift through the relevant research to decide which ones show
promise of efficacy and could feasibly be implemented by students (Pressley, Goodchild, Fleet, Zajchowski, & Evans,
1989).
Toward meeting this challenge, we explored the efficacy of
10 learning techniques (listed in Table 1) that students could
use to improve their success across a wide variety of content
domains.1
 The learning techniques we consider here were chosen on the basis of the following criteria. We chose some
techniques (e.g., self-testing, distributed practice) because an
initial survey of the literature indicated that they could improve
student success across a wide range of conditions. Other techniques (e.g., rereading and highlighting) were included
because students report using them frequently. Moreover, students are responsible for regulating an increasing amount of
their learning as they progress from elementary grades through
middle school and high school to college. Lifelong learners
also need to continue regulating their own learning, whether
it takes place in the context of postgraduate education, the
workplace, the development of new hobbies, or recreational
activities.
Thus, we limited our choices to techniques that could be
implemented by students without assistance (e.g., without
requiring advanced technologies or extensive materials that
would have to be prepared by a teacher). Some training may
be required for students to learn how to use a technique with
fidelity, but in principle, students should be able to use the
techniques without supervision. We also chose techniques for
which a sufficient amount of empirical evidence was available
to support at least a preliminary assessment of potential efficacy. Of course, we could not review all the techniques that
meet these criteria, given the in-depth nature of our reviews,
and these criteria excluded some techniques that show much
promise, such as techniques that are driven by advanced
technologies.
Because teachers are most likely to learn about these techniques in educational psychology classes, we examined
how some educational-psychology textbooks covered them
(Ormrod, 2008; Santrock, 2008; Slavin, 2009; Snowman,
The review for each technique can be read independently of the others, and particular variables of interest can be easily
compared across techniques.
To foreshadow our final recommendations, the techniques vary widely with respect to their generalizability and promise
for improving student learning. Practice testing and distributed practice received high utility assessments because they benefit
learners of different ages and abilities and have been shown to boost students’ performance across many criterion tasks and
even in educational contexts. Elaborative interrogation, self-explanation, and interleaved practice received moderate utility
assessments. The benefits of these techniques do generalize across some variables, yet despite their promise, they fell short
of a high utility assessment because the evidence for their efficacy is limited. For instance, elaborative interrogation and selfexplanation have not been adequately evaluated in educational contexts, and the benefits of interleaving have just begun to be
systematically explored, so the ultimate effectiveness of these techniques is currently unknown. Nevertheless, the techniques
that received moderate-utility ratings show enough promise for us to recommend their use in appropriate situations, which we
describe in detail within the review of each technique.
Five techniques received a low utility assessment: summarization, highlighting, the keyword mnemonic, imagery use for text
learning, and rereading. These techniques were rated as low utility for numerous reasons. Summarization and imagery use for
text learning have been shown to help some students on some criterion tasks, yet the conditions under which these techniques
produce benefits are limited, and much research is still needed to fully explore their overall effectiveness. The keyword mnemonic
is difficult to implement in some contexts, and it appears to benefit students for a limited number of materials and for short
retention intervals. Most students report rereading and highlighting, yet these techniques do not consistently boost students’
performance, so other techniques should be used in their place (e.g., practice testing instead of rereading).
Our hope is that this monograph will foster improvements in student learning, not only by showcasing which learning
techniques are likely to have the most generalizable effects but also by encouraging researchers to continue investigating the
most promising techniques. Accordingly, in our closing remarks, we discuss some issues for how these techniques could be
implemented by teachers and students, and we highlight directions for future research.
6 Dunlosky et al.
McCown, & Biehler, 2009; Sternberg & Williams, 2010;
Woolfolk, 2007). Despite the promise of some of the techniques, many of these textbooks did not provide sufficient
coverage, which would include up-to-date reviews of their
efficacy and analyses of their generalizability and potential
limitations. Accordingly, for all of the learning techniques
listed in Table 1, we reviewed the literature to identify the generalizability of their benefits across four categories of variables—materials, learning conditions, student characteristics,
and criterion tasks. The choice of these categories was inspired
by Jenkins’ (1979) model (for an example of its use in educational contexts, see Marsh & Butler, in press), and examples of
each category are presented in Table 2. Materials pertain to the
specific content that students are expected to learn, remember,
or comprehend. Learning conditions pertain to aspects of
the context in which students are interacting with the to-belearned materials. These conditions include aspects of the
learning environment itself (e.g., noisiness vs. quietness in a
classroom), but they largely pertain to the way in which a
learning technique is implemented. For instance, a technique
could be used only once or many times (a variable referred to
as dosage) when students are studying, or a technique could be
used when students are either reading or listening to the to-belearned materials.
Any number of student characteristics could also influence
the effectiveness of a given learning technique. For example,
in comparison to more advanced students, younger students in
early grades may not benefit from a technique. Students’ basic
cognitive abilities, such as working memory capacity or general fluid intelligence, may also influence the efficacy of a
given technique. In an educational context, domain knowledge
refers to the valid, relevant knowledge a student brings to a
lesson. Domain knowledge may be required for students to use
some of the learning techniques listed in Table 1. For instance,
Table 1. Learning Techniques
Technique Description
1. Elaborative interrogation Generating an explanation for why an explicitly stated fact or concept is true
2. Self-explanation Explaining how new information is related to known information, or explaining steps taken
during problem solving
3. Summarization Writing summaries (of various lengths) of to-be-learned texts
4. Highlighting/underlining Marking potentially important portions of to-be-learned materials while reading
5. Keyword mnemonic Using keywords and mental imagery to associate verbal materials
6. Imagery for text Attempting to form mental images of text materials while reading or listening
7. Rereading Restudying text material again after an initial reading
8. Practice testing Self-testing or taking practice tests over to-be-learned material
9. Distributed practice Implementing a schedule of practice that spreads out study activities over time
10. Interleaved practice Implementing a schedule of practice that mixes different kinds of problems, or a schedule of
study that mixes different kinds of material, within a single study session
Note. See text for a detailed description of each learning technique and relevant examples of their use.
Table 2. Examples of the Four Categories of Variables for Generalizability
Materials Learning conditions Student characteristicsa Criterion tasks
Vocabulary Amount of practice (dosage) Age Cued recall
Translation equivalents Open- vs. closed-book practice Prior domain knowledge Free recall
Lecture content Reading vs. listening Working memory capacity Recognition
Science definitions Incidental vs. intentional learning Verbal ability Problem solving
Narrative texts Direct instruction Interests Argument development
Expository texts Discovery learning Fluid intelligence Essay writing
Mathematical concepts Rereading lagsb Motivation Creation of portfolios
Maps Kind of practice testsc Prior achievement Achievement tests
Diagrams Group vs. individual learning Self-efficacy Classroom quizzes
a
Some of these characteristics are more state based (e.g., motivation) and some are more trait based (e.g., fluid intelligence); this distinction is
relevant to the malleability of each characteristic, but a discussion of this dimension is beyond the scope of this article.
b
Learning condition is specific to rereading.
c
Learning condition is specific to practice testing.
Improving Student Achievement 7
the use of imagery while reading texts requires that students
know the objects and ideas that the words refer to so that they
can produce internal images of them. Students with some
domain knowledge about a topic may also find it easier to use
self-explanation and elaborative interrogation, which are two
techniques that involve answering “why” questions about a
particular concept (e.g., “Why would particles of ice rise up
within a cloud?”). Domain knowledge may enhance the benefits of summarization and highlighting as well. Nevertheless,
although some domain knowledge will benefit students as
they begin learning new content within a given domain, it is
not a prerequisite for using most of the learning techniques.
The degree to which the efficacy of each learning technique
obtains across long retention intervals and generalizes across
different criterion tasks is of critical importance. Our reviews
and recommendations are based on evidence, which typically
pertains to students’ objective performance on any number of
criterion tasks. Criterion tasks (Table 2, rightmost column)
vary with respect to the specific kinds of knowledge that they
tap. Some tasks are meant to tap students’ memory for information (e.g., “What is operant conditioning?”), others are
largely meant to tap students’ comprehension (e.g., “Explain
the difference between classical conditioning and operant conditioning”), and still others are meant to tap students’ application of knowledge (e.g., “How would you apply operant
conditioning to train a dog to sit down?”). Indeed, Bloom and
colleagues divided learning objectives into six categories,
from memory (or knowledge) and comprehension of facts to
their application, analysis, synthesis, and evaluation (B. S.
Bloom, Engelhart, Furst, Hill, & Krathwohl, 1956; for an
updated taxonomy, see L. W. Anderson & Krathwohl, 2001).
In discussing how the techniques influence criterion performance, we emphasize investigations that have gone beyond
demonstrating improved memory for target material by measuring students’ comprehension, application, and transfer of
knowledge. Note, however, that although gaining factual
knowledge is not considered the only or ultimate objective of
schooling, we unabashedly consider efforts to improve student
retention of knowledge as essential for reaching other instructional objectives; if one does not remember core ideas, facts,
or concepts, applying them may prove difficult, if not impossible. Students who have forgotten principles of algebra will
be unable to apply them to solve problems or use them as a
foundation for learning calculus (or physics, economics, or
other related domains), and students who do not remember
what operant conditioning is will likely have difficulties
applying it to solve behavioral problems. We are not advocating that students spend their time robotically memorizing
facts; instead, we are acknowledging the important interplay
between memory for a concept on one hand and the ability to
comprehend and apply it on the other.
An aim of this monograph is to encourage students to use
the appropriate learning technique (or techniques) to accomplish a given instructional objective. Some learning techniques
are largely focused on bolstering students’ memory for facts
(e.g., the keyword mnemonic), others are focused more on
improving comprehension (e.g., self-explanation), and yet
others may enhance both memory and comprehension (e.g.,
practice testing). Thus, our review of each learning technique
describes how it can be used, its effectiveness for producing
long-term retention and comprehension, and its breadth of
efficacy across the categories of variables listed in Table 2.
Reviewing the Learning Techniques
In the following series of reviews, we consider the available
evidence for the efficacy of each of the learning techniques.
Each review begins with a brief description of the technique
and a discussion about why it is expected to improve student
learning. We then consider generalizability (with respect to
learning conditions, materials, student characteristics, and criterion tasks), highlight any research on the technique that has
been conducted in representative educational contexts, and
address any identified issues for implementing the technique.
Accordingly, the reviews are largely modular: Each of the 10
reviews is organized around these themes (with corresponding
headers) so readers can easily identify the most relevant information without necessarily having to read the monograph in
its entirety.
At the end of each review, we provide an overall assessment for each technique in terms of its relatively utility—low,
moderate, or high. Students and teachers who are not already
doing so should consider using techniques designated as high
utility, because the effects of these techniques are robust and
generalize widely. Techniques could have been designated as
low utility or moderate utility for any number of reasons. For
instance, a technique could have been designated as low utility
because its effects are limited to a small subset of materials
that students need to learn; the technique may be useful in
some cases and adopted in appropriate contexts, but, relative
to the other techniques, it would be considered low in utility
because of its limited generalizability. A technique could also
receive a low- or moderate-utility rating if it showed promise,
yet insufficient evidence was available to support confidence
in assigning a higher utility assessment. In such cases, we
encourage researchers to further explore these techniques
within educational settings, but students and teachers may
want to use caution before adopting them widely. Most important, given that each utility assessment could have been
assigned for a variety of reasons, we discuss the rationale for a
given assessment at the end of each review.
Finally, our intent was to conduct exhaustive reviews of
the literature on each learning technique. For techniques that
have been reviewed extensively (e.g., distributed practice),
however, we relied on previous reviews and supplemented
them with any research that appeared after they had been published. For many of the learning techniques, too many articles
have been published to cite them all; therefore, in our discussion of most of the techniques, we cite a subset of relevant
articles.
8 Dunlosky et al.
1 Elaborative interrogation
Anyone who has spent time around young children knows that
one of their most frequent utterances is “Why?” (perhaps coming in a close second behind “No!”). Humans are inquisitive
creatures by nature, attuned to seeking explanations for states,
actions, and events in the world around us. Fortunately, a sizable body of evidence suggests that the power of explanatory
questioning can be harnessed to promote learning. Specifically, research on both elaborative interrogation and selfexplanation has shown that prompting students to answer
“Why?” questions can facilitate learning. These two literatures
are highly related but have mostly developed independently of
one another. Additionally, they have overlapping but nonidentical strengths and weaknesses. For these reasons, we consider
the two literatures separately.
1.1 General description of elaborative interrogation and
why it should work. In one of the earliest systematic studies
of elaborative interrogation, Pressley, McDaniel, Turnure,
Wood, and Ahmad (1987) presented undergraduate students
with a list of sentences, each describing the action of a particular man (e.g., “The hungry man got into the car”). In the elaborative-interrogation group, for each sentence, participants
were prompted to explain “Why did that particular man do
that?” Another group of participants was instead provided
with an explanation for each sentence (e.g., “The hungry man
got into the car to go to the restaurant”), and a third group
simply read each sentence. On a final test in which participants
were cued to recall which man performed each action (e.g.,
“Who got in the car?”), the elaborative-interrogation group
substantially outperformed the other two groups (collapsing
across experiments, accuracy in this group was approximately
72%, compared with approximately 37% in each of the other
two groups). From this and similar studies, Seifert (1993)
reported average effect sizes ranging from 0.85 to 2.57.
As illustrated above, the key to elaborative interrogation
involves prompting learners to generate an explanation for an
explicitly stated fact. The particular form of the explanatory
prompt has differed somewhat across studies—examples
include “Why does it make sense that…?”, “Why is this true?”,
and simply “Why?” However, the majority of studies have
used prompts following the general format, “Why would this
fact be true of this [X] and not some other [X]?”
The prevailing theoretical account of elaborative-interrogation effects is that elaborative interrogation enhances learning
by supporting the integration of new information with existing
prior knowledge. During elaborative interrogation, learners
presumably “activate schemata . . . These schemata, in turn,
help to organize new information which facilitates retrieval”
(Willoughby & Wood, 1994, p. 140). Although the integration
of new facts with prior knowledge may facilitate the organization (Hunt, 2006) of that information, organization alone is not
sufficient—students must also be able to discriminate among
related facts to be accurate when identifying or using the
learned information (Hunt, 2006). Consistent with this account,
note that most elaborative-interrogation prompts explicitly or
implicitly invite processing of both similarities and differences
between related entities (e.g., why a fact would be true of one
province versus other provinces). As we highlight below, processing of similarities and differences among to-be-learned
facts also accounts for findings that elaborative-interrogation
effects are often larger when elaborations are precise rather
than imprecise, when prior knowledge is higher rather than
lower (consistent with research showing that preexisting
knowledge enhances memory by facilitating distinctive processing; e.g., Rawson & Van Overschelde, 2008), and when
elaborations are self-generated rather than provided (a finding
consistent with research showing that distinctiveness effects
depend on self-generating item-specific cues; Hunt & Smith,
1996).
1.2 How general are the effects of elaborative
interrogation?
1.2a Learning conditions. The seminal work by Pressley et al.
(1987; see also B. S. Stein & Bransford, 1979) spawned a
flurry of research in the following decade that was primarily
directed at assessing the generalizability of elaborative-interrogation effects. Some of this work focused on investigating
elaborative-interrogation effects under various learning conditions. Elaborative-interrogation effects have been consistently
shown using either incidental or intentional learning instructions (although two studies have suggested stronger effects for
incidental learning: Pressley et al., 1987; Woloshyn, Willoughby, Wood, & Pressley, 1990). Although most studies
have involved individual learning, elaborative-interrogation
effects have also been shown among students working in
dyads or small groups (Kahl & Woloshyn, 1994; Woloshyn &
Stockley, 1995).
1.2b Student characteristics. Elaborative-interrogation effects
also appear to be relatively robust across different kinds of
learners. Although a considerable amount of work has involved
undergraduate students, an impressive number of studies have
shown elaborative-interrogation effects with younger learners
as well. Elaborative interrogation has been shown to improve
learning for high school students, middle school students, and
upper elementary school students (fourth through sixth graders). The extent to which elaborative interrogation benefits
younger learners is less clear. Miller and Pressley (1989) did
not find effects for kindergartners or first graders, and Wood,
Miller, Symons, Canough, and Yedlicka (1993) reported
mixed results for preschoolers. Nonetheless, elaborative interrogation does appear to benefit learners across a relatively
wide age range. Furthermore, several of the studies involving
younger students have also established elaborative-interrogation effects for learners of varying ability levels, including
fourth through twelfth graders with learning disabilities (C.
Greene, Symons, & Richards, 1996; Scruggs, Mastropieri, &
Sullivan, 1994) and sixth through eighth graders with mild 
Improving Student Achievement 9
cognitive disabilities (Scruggs, Mastropieri, Sullivan, & Hesser, 1993), although Wood, Willoughby, Bolger, Younger, and
Kaspar (1993) did not find effects with a sample of lowachieving students. On the other end of the continuum, elaborative-interrogation effects have been shown for high-achieving
fifth and sixth graders (Wood & Hewitt, 1993; Wood, Willoughby, et al., 1993).
Another key dimension along which learners differ is level
of prior knowledge, a factor that has been extensively investigated within the literature on elaborative interrogation. Both
correlational and experimental evidence suggest that prior
knowledge is an important moderator of elaborative-interrogation effects, such that effects generally increase as prior
knowledge increases. For example, Woloshyn, Pressley, and
Schneider (1992) presented Canadian and German students
with facts about Canadian provinces and German states. Thus,
both groups of students had more domain knowledge for one
set of facts and less domain knowledge for the other set. As
shown in Figure 1, students showed larger effects of elaborative interrogation in their high-knowledge domain (a 24%
increase) than in their low-knowledge domain (a 12%
increase). Other studies manipulating the familiarity of to-belearned materials have reported similar patterns, with significant effects for new facts about familiar items but weaker or
nonexistent effects for facts about unfamiliar items. Despite
some exceptions (e.g., Ozgungor & Guthrie, 2004), the overall
conclusion that emerges from the literature is that high-knowledge learners will generally be best equipped to profit from the
elaborative-interrogation technique. The benefit for lowerknowledge learners is less certain.
One intuitive explanation for why prior knowledge moderates the effects of elaborative interrogation is that higher
knowledge permits the generation of more appropriate explanations for why a fact is true. If so, one might expect final-test
performance to vary as a function of the quality of the explanations generated during study. However, the evidence is mixed.
Whereas some studies have found that test performance is better following adequate elaborative-interrogation responses
(i.e., those that include a precise, plausible, or accurate explanation for a fact) than for inadequate responses, the differences
have often been small, and other studies have failed to find
differences (although the numerical trends are usually in the
anticipated direction). A somewhat more consistent finding is
that performance is better following an adequate response than
no response, although in this case, too, the results are somewhat mixed. More generally, the available evidence should be
interpreted with caution, given that outcomes are based on
conditional post hoc analyses that likely reflect item-selection
effects. Thus, the extent to which elaborative-interrogation
effects depend on the quality of the elaborations generated is
still an open question.
1.2c Materials. Although several studies have replicated
elaborative-interrogation effects using the relatively artificial
“man sentences” used by Pressley et al. (1987), the majority of
subsequent research has extended these effects using materials
that better represent what students are actually expected to
learn. The most commonly used materials involved sets of
facts about various familiar and unfamiliar animals (e.g., “The
Western Spotted Skunk’s hole is usually found on a sandy
piece of farmland near crops”), usually with an elaborativeinterrogation prompt following the presentation of each fact.
Other studies have extended elaborative-interrogation effects
to fact lists from other content domains, including facts
about U.S. states, German states, Canadian provinces, and
universities; possible reasons for dinosaur extinction; and
gender-specific facts about men and women. Other studies
have shown elaborative-interrogation effects for factual statements about various topics (e.g., the solar system) that are normatively consistent or inconsistent with learners’ prior beliefs
(e.g., Woloshyn, Paivio, & Pressley, 1994). Effects have also
been shown for facts contained in longer connected discourse,
including expository texts on animals (e.g., Seifert, 1994);
human digestion (B. L. Smith, Holliday, & Austin, 2010); the
neuropsychology of phantom pain (Ozgungor & Guthrie,
2004); retail, merchandising, and accounting (Dornisch &
Sperling, 2006); and various science concepts (McDaniel &
Donnelly, 1996). Thus, elaborative-interrogation effects are
relatively robust across factual material of different kinds and
with different contents. However, it is important to note that
elaborative interrogation has been applied (and may be applicable) only to discrete units of factual information.
1.2d Criterion tasks. Whereas elaborative-interrogation
effects appear to be relatively robust across materials and
learners, the extensions of elaborative-interrogation effects
across measures that tap different kinds or levels of learning is
somewhat more limited. With only a few exceptions, the
majority of elaborative-interrogation studies have relied on the
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
High Knowledge Low Knowledge
Final-Test Performance (%)
Elaborative Interrogation
Reading Control
Fig. 1. Mean percentage of correct responses on a final test for learners
with high or low domain knowledge who engaged in elaborative interrogation or in reading only during learning (in Woloshyn, Pressley, & Schneider,
1992). Standard errors are not available.
10 Dunlosky et al.
following associative-memory measures: cued recall (generally involving the presentation of a fact to prompt recall of the
entity for which the fact is true; e.g., “Which animal . . . ?”)
and matching (in which learners are presented with lists of
facts and entities and must match each fact with the correct
entity). Effects have also been shown on measures of fact recognition (B. L. Smith et al., 2010; Woloshyn et al., 1994;
Woloshyn & Stockley, 1995). Concerning more generative
measures, a few studies have also found elaborative-interrogation effects on free-recall tests (e.g., Woloshyn & Stockley,
1995; Woloshyn et al., 1994), but other studies have not
(Dornisch & Sperling, 2006; McDaniel & Donnelly, 1996).
All of the aforementioned measures primarily reflect memory for explicitly stated information. Only three studies have
used measures tapping comprehension or application of the
factual information. All three studies reported elaborativeinterrogation effects on either multiple-choice or verification
tests that required inferences or higher-level integration
(Dornisch & Sperling, 2006; McDaniel & Donnelly, 1996;
Ozgungor & Guthrie, 2004). Ozgungor and Guthrie (2004)
also found that elaborative interrogation improved performance on a concept-relatedness rating task (in brief, students
rated the pairwise relatedness of the key concepts from a passage, and rating coherence was assessed via Pathfinder analyses); however, Dornisch and Sperling (2006) did not find
significant elaborative-interrogation effects on a problemsolving test. In sum, whereas elaborative-interrogation effects
on associative memory have been firmly established, the
extent to which elaborative interrogation facilitates recall or
comprehension is less certain.
Of even greater concern than the limited array of measures
that have been used is the fact that few studies have examined
performance after meaningful delays. Almost all prior studies
have administered outcome measures either immediately or
within a few minutes of the learning phase. Results from the
few studies that have used longer retention intervals are promising. Elaborative-interrogation effects have been shown after
delays of 1–2 weeks (Scruggs et al., 1994; Woloshyn et al.,
1994), 1–2 months (Kahl & Woloshyn, 1994; Willoughby,
Waller, Wood, & MacKinnon, 1993; Woloshyn & Stockley,
1995), and even 75 and 180 days (Woloshyn et al., 1994). In
almost all of these studies, however, the delayed test was preceded by one or more criterion tests at shorter intervals, introducing the possibility that performance on the delayed test was
contaminated by the practice provided by the preceding tests.
Thus, further work is needed before any definitive conclusions
can be drawn about the extent to which elaborative interrogation produces durable gains in learning.
1.3 Effects in representative educational contexts. Concerning the evidence that elaborative interrogation will
enhance learning in representative educational contexts, few
studies have been conducted outside the laboratory. However,
outcomes from a recent study are suggestive (B. L. Smith
et al., 2010). Participants were undergraduates enrolled in an
introductory biology course, and the experiment was conducted during class meetings in the accompanying lab section.
During one class meeting, students completed a measure of
verbal ability and a prior-knowledge test over material that
was related, but not identical, to the target material. In the following week, students were presented with a lengthy text on
human digestion that was taken from a chapter in the course
textbook. For half of the students, 21 elaborative interrogation
prompts were interspersed throughout the text (roughly one
prompt per 150 words), each consisting of a paraphrased statement from the text followed by “Why is this true?” The
remaining students were simply instructed to study the text at
their own pace, without any prompts. All students then completed 105 true/false questions about the material (none of
which were the same as the elaborative-interrogation prompts).
Performance was better for the elaborative-interrogation group
than for the control group (76% versus 69%), even after controlling for prior knowledge and verbal ability.
1.4 Issues for implementation. One possible merit of elaborative interrogation is that it apparently requires minimal training. In the majority of studies reporting elaborative-interrogation
effects, learners were given brief instructions and then practiced generating elaborations for 3 or 4 practice facts (sometimes, but not always, with feedback about the quality of the
elaborations) before beginning the main task. In some studies,
learners were not provided with any practice or illustrative
examples prior to the main task. Additionally, elaborative
interrogation appears to be relatively reasonable with respect
to time demands. Almost all studies set reasonable limits on
the amount of time allotted for reading a fact and for generating an elaboration (e.g., 15 seconds allotted for each fact).
In one of the few studies permitting self-paced learning, the
time-on-task difference between the elaborative-interrogation
and reading-only groups was relatively minimal (32 minutes
vs. 28 minutes; B. L. Smith et al., 2010). Finally, the consistency of the prompts used across studies allows for relatively
straightforward recommendations to students about the nature
of the questions they should use to elaborate on facts during
study.
With that said, one limitation noted above concerns the
potentially narrow applicability of elaborative interrogation to
discrete factual statements. As Hamilton (1997) noted, “elaborative interrogation is fairly prescribed when focusing on a list
of factual sentences. However, when focusing on more complex outcomes, it is not as clear to what one should direct the
‘why’ questions” (p. 308). For example, when learning about a
complex causal process or system (e.g., the digestive system),
the appropriate grain size for elaborative interrogation is an
open question (e.g., should a prompt focus on an entire system
or just a smaller part of it?). Furthermore, whereas the facts to
be elaborated are clear when dealing with fact lists, elaborating on facts embedded in lengthier texts will require students
to identify their own target facts. Thus, students may need
some instruction about the kinds of content to which 
Improving Student Achievement 11
elaborative interrogation may be fruitfully applied. Dosage is
also of concern with lengthier text, with some evidence suggesting that elaborative-interrogation effects are substantially
diluted (Callender & McDaniel, 2007) or even reversed (Ramsay, Sperling, & Dornisch, 2010) when elaborative-interrogation prompts are administered infrequently (e.g., one prompt
every 1 or 2 pages).
1.5 Elaborative interrogation: Overall assessment. We rate
elaborative interrogation as having moderate utility. Elaborative-interrogation effects have been shown across a relatively
broad range of factual topics, although some concerns remain
about the applicability of elaborative interrogation to material
that is lengthier or more complex than fact lists. Concerning
learner characteristics, effects of elaborative interrogation
have been consistently documented for learners at least as
young as upper elementary age, but some evidence suggests
that the benefits of elaborative interrogation may be limited
for learners with low levels of domain knowledge. Concerning
criterion tasks, elaborative-interrogation effects have been
firmly established on measures of associative memory administered after short delays, but firm conclusions about the extent
to which elaborative interrogation benefits comprehension or
the extent to which elaborative-interrogation effects persist
across longer delays await further research. Further research
demonstrating the efficacy of elaborative interrogation in representative educational contexts would also be useful. In sum,
the need for further research to establish the generalizability of
elaborative-interrogation effects is primarily why this technique did not receive a high-utility rating.
2 Self-explanation
2.1 General description of self-explanation and why it
should work. In the seminal study on self-explanation, Berry
(1983) explored its effects on logical reasoning using the
Wason card-selection task. In this task, a student might see
four cards labeled “A,” “4,” “D,” and “3" and be asked to indicate which cards must be turned over to test the rule “if a card
has A on one side, it has 3 on the other side” (an instantiation
of the more general “if P, then Q” rule). Students were first
asked to solve a concrete instantiation of the rule (e.g., flavor
of jam on one side of a jar and the sale price on the other);
accuracy was near zero. They then were provided with a minimal explanation about how to solve the “if P, then Q” rule and
were given a set of concrete problems involving the use of this
and other logical rules (e.g., “if P, then not Q”). For this set of
concrete practice problems, one group of students was
prompted to self-explain while solving each problem by stating the reasons for choosing or not choosing each card.
Another group of students solved all problems in the set and
only then were asked to explain how they had gone about solving the problems. Students in a control group were not
prompted to self-explain at any point. Accuracy on the practice problems was 90% or better in all three groups. However,
when the logical rules were instantiated in a set of abstract
problems presented during a subsequent transfer test, the two
self-explanation groups substantially outperformed the control
group (see Fig. 2). In a second experiment, another control
group was explicitly told about the logical connection between
the concrete practice problems they had just solved and the
forthcoming abstract problems, but they fared no better (28%).
As illustrated above, the core component of self-explanation involves having students explain some aspect of their processing during learning. Consistent with basic theoretical
assumptions about the related technique of elaborative interrogation, self-explanation may enhance learning by supporting the integration of new information with existing prior
knowledge. However, compared with the consistent prompts
used in the elaborative-interrogation literature, the prompts
used to elicit self-explanations have been much more variable
across studies. Depending on the variation of the prompt used,
the particular mechanisms underlying self-explanation effects
may differ somewhat. The key continuum along which selfexplanation prompts differ concerns the degree to which they
are content-free versus content-specific. For example, many
studies have used prompts that include no explicit mention of
particular content from the to-be-learned materials (e.g.,
“Explain what the sentence means to you. That is, what new
information does the sentence provide for you? And how does
it relate to what you already know?”). On the other end of the
continuum, many studies have used prompts that are much
more content-specific, such that different prompts are used for
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
Concrete Practice
Problems
Abstract Transfer
Problems
Problem Solving Accuracy (%)
Concurrent Self-Explanation
Retrospective Self-Explanation
No Self-Explanation
Fig. 2. Mean percentage of logical-reasoning problems answered correctly for concrete practice problems and subsequently administered abstract transfer problems in Berry (1983). During a practice phase, learners
self-explained while solving each problem, self-explained after solving all
problems, or were not prompted to engage in self-explanation. Standard
errors are not available.
12 Dunlosky et al.
different items (e.g., “Why do you calculate the total acceptable outcomes by multiplying?” “Why is the numerator 14 and
the denominator 7 in this step?”). For present purposes, we
limit our review to studies that have used prompts that are
relatively content-free. Although many of the content-specific
prompts do elicit explanations, the relatively structured nature
of these prompts would require teachers to construct sets of
specific prompts to put into practice, rather than capturing a
more general technique that students could be taught to use on
their own. Furthermore, in some studies that have been situated in the self-explanation literature, the nature of the prompts
is functionally more closely aligned with that of practice
testing.
Even within the set of studies selected for review here, considerable variability remains in the self-explanation prompts
that have been used. Furthermore, the range of tasks and measures that have been used to explore self-explanation is quite
large. Although we view this range as a strength of the literature, the variability in self-explanation prompts, tasks, and
measures does not easily support a general summative statement about the mechanisms that underlie self-explanation
effects.
2.2 How general are the effects of self-explanation?
2.2a Learning conditions. Several studies have manipulated
other aspects of learning conditions in addition to selfexplanation. For example, Rittle-Johnson (2006) found that
self-explanation was effective when accompanied by either
direct instruction or discovery learning. Concerning potential moderating factors, Berry (1983) included a group who
self-explained after the completion of each problem rather
than during problem solving. Retrospective self-explanation
did enhance performance relative to no self-explanation, but
the effects were not as pronounced as with concurrent selfexplanation. Another moderating factor may concern the
extent to which provided explanations are made available to
learners. Schworm and Renkl (2006) found that self-explanation effects were significantly diminished when learners
could access explanations, presumably because learners
made minimal attempts to answer the explanatory prompts
before consulting the provided information (see also Aleven
& Koedinger, 2002).
2.2b Student characteristics. Self-explanation effects have
been shown with both younger and older learners. Indeed,
self-explanation research has relied much less heavily on samples of college students than most other literatures have, with
at least as many studies involving younger learners as involving undergraduates. Several studies have reported selfexplanation effects with kindergartners, and other studies have
shown effects for elementary school students, middle school
students, and high school students.
In contrast to the breadth of age groups examined, the
extent to which the effects of self-explanation generalize
across different levels of prior knowledge or ability has not
been sufficiently explored. Concerning knowledge level,
several studies have used pretests to select participants with
relatively low levels of knowledge or task experience, but no
research has systematically examined self-explanation effects
as a function of knowledge level. Concerning ability level,
Chi, de Leeuw, Chiu, and LaVancher (1994) examined the
effects of self-explanation on learning from an expository text
about the circulatory system among participants in their sample who had received the highest and lowest scores on a measure of general aptitude and found gains of similar magnitude
in each group. In contrast, Didierjean and Cauzinille-Marmèche (1997) examined algebra-problem solving in a sample
of ninth graders with either low or intermediate algebra skills,
and they found self-explanation effects only for lower-skill
students. Further work is needed to establish the generality of
self-explanation effects across these important idiographic
dimensions.
2.2c Materials. One of the strengths of the self-explanation
literature is that effects have been shown not only across different materials within a task domain but also across several
different task domains. In addition to the logical-reasoning
problems used by Berry (1983), self-explanation has been
shown to support the solving of other kinds of logic puzzles.
Self-explanation has also been shown to facilitate the solving
of various kinds of math problems, including simple addition
problems for kindergartners, mathematical-equivalence problems for elementary-age students, and algebraic formulas and
geometric theorems for older learners. In addition to improving problem solving, self-explanation improved student teachers’ evaluation of the goodness of practice problems for use
in classroom instruction. Self-explanation has also helped
younger learners overcome various kinds of misconceptions,
improving children’s understanding of false belief (i.e., that
individuals can have a belief that is different from reality),
number conservation (i.e., that the number of objects in
an array does not change when the positions of those objects
in the array change), and principles of balance (e.g., that not
all objects balance on a fulcrum at their center point). Selfexplanation has improved children’s pattern learning and
adults’ learning of endgame strategies in chess. Although most
of the research on self-explanation has involved procedural or
problem-solving tasks, several studies have also shown selfexplanation effects for learning from text, including both short
narratives and lengthier expository texts. Thus, self-explanation appears to be broadly applicable.
2.2d Criterion tasks. Given the range of tasks and domains in
which self-explanation has been investigated, it is perhaps not
surprising that self-explanation effects have been shown on a
wide range of criterion measures. Some studies have shown
self-explanation effects on standard measures of memory,
including free recall, cued recall, fill-in-the-blank tests, associative matching, and multiple-choice tests tapping explicitly
stated information. Studies involving text learning have also
shown effects on measures of comprehension, including diagram-drawing tasks, application-based questions, and tasks in
which learners must make inferences on the basis of 
Improving Student Achievement 13
information implied but not explicitly stated in a text. Across
those studies involving some form of problem-solving task,
virtually every study has shown self-explanation effects on
near-transfer tests in which students are asked to solve problems that have the same structure as, but are nonidentical to,
the practice problems. Additionally, self-explanation effects
on far-transfer tests (in which students are asked to solve problems that differ from practice problems not only in their surface features but also in one or more structural aspects) have
been shown for the solving of math problems and pattern
learning. Thus, self-explanation facilitates an impressive range
of learning outcomes.
In contrast, the durability of self-explanation effects is woefully underexplored. Almost every study to date has administered criterion tests within minutes of completion of the
learning phase. Only five studies have used longer retention
intervals. Self-explanation effects persisted across 1–2 day
delays for playing chess endgames (de Bruin, Rikers, &
Schmidt, 2007) and for retention of short narratives (Magliano,
Trabasso, & Graesser, 1999). Self-explanation effects persisted across a 1-week delay for the learning of geometric
theorems (although an additional study session intervened
between initial learning and the final test; R. M. F. Wong,
Lawson, & Keeves, 2002) and for learning from a text on the
circulatory system (although the final test was an open-book
test; Chi et al., 1994). Finally, Rittle-Johnson (2006) reported
significant effects on performance in solving math problems
after a 2-week delay; however, the participants in this study
also completed an immediate test, thus introducing the possibility that testing effects influenced performance on the
delayed test. Taken together, the outcomes of these few studies
are promising, but considerably more research is needed
before confident conclusions can be made about the longevity
of self-explanation effects.
2.3 Effects in representative educational contexts. Concerning the strength of the evidence that self-explanation will
enhance learning in educational contexts, outcomes from two
studies in which participants were asked to learn course-relevant
content are at least suggestive. In a study by Schworm and
Renkl (2006), students in a teacher-education program learned
how to develop example problems to use in their classrooms
by studying samples of well-designed and poorly designed
example problems in a computer program. On each trial, students in a self-explanation group were prompted to explain
why one of two examples was more effective than the other,
whereas students in a control group were not prompted to selfexplain. Half of the participants in each group were also given
the option to examine experimenter-provided explanations on
each trial. On an immediate test in which participants selected
and developed example problems, the self-explanation group
outperformed the control group. However, this effect was limited to students who had not been able to view provided explanations, presumably because students made minimal attempts
to self-explain before consulting the provided information.
R. M. F. Wong et al. (2002) presented ninth-grade students
in a geometry class with a theorem from the course textbook
that had not yet been studied in class. During the initial learning session, students were asked to think aloud while studying
the relevant material (including the theorem, an illustration of
its proof, and an example of an application of the theorem to a
problem). Half of the students were specifically prompted to
self-explain after every 1 or 2 lines of new information (e.g.,
“What parts of this page are new to me? What does the statement mean? Is there anything I still don’t understand?”),
whereas students in a control group received nonspecific
instructions that simply prompted them to think aloud during
study. The following week, all students received a basic review
of the theorem and completed the final test the next day. Selfexplanation did not improve performance on near-transfer
questions but did improve performance on far-transfer
questions.
2.4 Issues for implementation. As noted above, a particular
strength of the self-explanation strategy is its broad applicability across a range of tasks and content domains. Furthermore,
in almost all of the studies reporting significant effects of selfexplanation, participants were provided with minimal instructions and little to no practice with self-explanation prior to
completing the experimental task. Thus, most students apparently can profit from self-explanation with minimal training.
However, some students may require more instruction to
successfully implement self-explanation. In a study by Didierjean and Cauzinille-Marmèche (1997), ninth graders with
poor algebra skills received minimal training prior to engaging
in self-explanation while solving algebra problems; analysis
of think-aloud protocols revealed that students produced many
more paraphrases than explanations. Several studies have
reported positive correlations between final-test performance
and both the quantity and quality of explanations generated by
students during learning, further suggesting that the benefit of
self-explanation might be enhanced by teaching students how
to effectively implement the self-explanation technique (for
examples of training methods, see Ainsworth & Burcham,
2007; R. M. F. Wong et al., 2002). However, in at least some
of these studies, students who produced more or better-quality
self-explanations may have had greater domain knowledge; if
so, then further training with the technique may not have benefited the more poorly performing students. Investigating the
contribution of these factors (skill at self-explanation vs.
domain knowledge) to the efficacy of self-explanation will
have important implications for how and when to use this
technique.
An outstanding issue concerns the time demands associated
with self-explanation and the extent to which self-explanation
effects may have been due to increased time on task. Unfortunately, few studies equated time on task when comparing selfexplanation conditions to control conditions involving other
strategies or activities, and most studies involving self-paced
practice did not report participants’ time on task. In the few 
14 Dunlosky et al.
studies reporting time on task, self-paced administration usually yielded nontrivial increases (30–100%) in the amount of
time spent learning in the self-explanation condition relative
to other conditions, a result that is perhaps not surprising,
given the high dosage levels at which self-explanation was
implemented. For example, Chi et al. (1994) prompted learners to self-explain after reading each sentence of an expository
text, which doubled the amount of time the group spent studying the text relative to a rereading control group (125 vs. 66
minutes, respectively). With that said, Schworm and Renkl
(2006) reported that time on task was not correlated with performance across groups, and Ainsworth and Burcham (2007)
reported that controlling for study time did not eliminate
effects of self-explanation.
Within the small number of studies in which time on
task was equated, results were somewhat mixed. Three studies
equating time on task reported significant effects of selfexplanation (de Bruin et al., 2007; de Koning, Tabbers, Rikers,
& Paas, 2011; O’Reilly, Symons, & MacLatchy-Gaudet,
1998). In contrast, Matthews and Rittle-Johnson (2009) had
one group of third through fifth graders practice solving math
problems with self-explanation and a control group solve
twice as many practice problems without self-explanation; the
two groups performed similarly on a final test. Clearly, further
research is needed to establish the bang for the buck provided
by self-explanation before strong prescriptive conclusions can
be made.
2.5 Self-explanation: Overall assessment. We rate selfexplanation as having moderate utility. A major strength of
this technique is that its effects have been shown across different content materials within task domains as well as across
several different task domains. Self-explanation effects have
also been shown across an impressive age range, although further work is needed to explore the extent to which these effects
depend on learners’ knowledge or ability level. Self-explanation effects have also been shown across an impressive range
of learning outcomes, including various measures of memory,
comprehension, and transfer. In contrast, further research is
needed to establish the durability of these effects across educationally relevant delays and to establish the efficacy of selfexplanation in representative educational contexts. Although
most research has shown effects of self-explanation with minimal training, some results have suggested that effects may be
enhanced if students are taught how to effectively implement
the self-explanation strategy. One final concern has to do with
the nontrivial time demands associated with self-explanation,
at least at the dosages examined in most of the research that
has shown effects of this strategy.
3 Summarization
Students often have to learn large amounts of information,
which requires them to identify what is important and how different ideas connect to one another. One popular technique for
accomplishing these goals involves having students write
summaries of to-be-learned texts. Successful summaries identify the main points of a text and capture the gist of it while
excluding unimportant or repetitive material (A. L. Brown,
Campione, & Day, 1981). Although learning to construct
accurate summaries is often an instructional goal in its own
right (e.g., Wade-Stein & Kintsch, 2004), our interest here
concerns whether doing so will boost students’ performance
on later criterion tests that cover the target material.
3.1 General description of summarization and why it
should work. As an introduction to the issues relevant to summarization, we begin with a description of a prototypical
experiment. Bretzing and Kulhavy (1979) had high school
juniors and seniors study a 2,000-word text about a fictitious
tribe of people. Students were assigned to one of five learning
conditions and given up to 30 minutes to study the text. After
reading each page, students in a summarization group were
instructed to write three lines of text that summarized the main
points from that page. Students in a note-taking group received
similar instructions, except that they were told to take up to
three lines of notes on each page of text while reading. Students in a verbatim-copying group were instructed to locate
and copy the three most important lines on each page. Students
in a letter-search group copied all the capitalized words in the
text, also filling up three lines. Finally, students in a control
group simply read the text without recording anything. (A subset of students from the four conditions involving writing were
allowed to review what they had written, but for present purposes we will focus on the students who did not get a chance to
review before the final test.) Students were tested either shortly
after learning or 1 week later, answering 25 questions that
required them to connect information from across the text. On
both the immediate and delayed tests, students in the summarization and note-taking groups performed best, followed by the
students in the verbatim-copying and control groups, with the
worst performance in the letter-search group (see Fig. 3).
Bretzing and Kulhavy’s (1979) results fit nicely with the
claim that summarization boosts learning and retention
because it involves attending to and extracting the higher-level
meaning and gist of the material. The conditions in the experiment were specifically designed to manipulate how much students processed the texts for meaning, with the letter-search
condition involving shallow processing of the text that did not
require learners to extract its meaning (Craik & Lockhart,
1972). Summarization was more beneficial than that shallow
task and yielded benefits similar to those of note-taking,
another task known to boost learning (e.g., Bretzing & Kulhavy, 1981; Crawford, 1925a, 1925b; Di Vesta & Gray, 1972).
More than just facilitating the extraction of meaning, however,
summarization should also boost organizational processing,
given that extracting the gist of a text requires learners to
connect disparate pieces of the text, as opposed to simply
evaluating its individual components (similar to the way in
which note-taking affords organizational processing; Einstein, 
Improving Student Achievement 15
Morris, & Smith, 1985). One last point should be made about
the results from Bretzing and Kulhavy (1979)—namely, that
summarization and note-taking were both more beneficial
than was verbatim copying. Students in the verbatim-copying
group still had to locate the most important information in the
text, but they did not synthesize it into a summary or rephrase
it in their notes. Thus, writing about the important points in
one’s own words produced a benefit over and above that of
selecting important information; students benefited from the
more active processing involved in summarization and notetaking (see Wittrock, 1990, and Chi, 2009, for reviews of
active/generative learning). These explanations all suggest
that summarization helps students identify and organize the
main ideas within a text.
So how strong is the evidence that summarization is a beneficial learning strategy? One reason this question is difficult
to answer is that the summarization strategy has been implemented in many different ways across studies, making it difficult to draw general conclusions about its efficacy. Pressley
and colleagues described the situation well when they noted
that “summarization is not one strategy but a family of strategies” (Pressley, Johnson, Symons, McGoldrick, & Kurita,
1989, p. 5). Depending on the particular instructions given, students’ summaries might consist of single words, sentences, or
longer paragraphs; be limited in length or not; capture an entire
text or only a portion of it; be written or spoken aloud; or be
produced from memory or with the text present.
A lot of research has involved summarization in some form,
yet whereas some evidence demonstrates that summarization
works (e.g., L. W. Brooks, Dansereau, Holley, & Spurlin,
1983; Doctorow, Wittrock, & Marks, 1978), T. H. Anderson
and Armbruster’s (1984) conclusion that “research in support
of summarizing as a studying activity is sparse indeed”
(p. 670) is not outmoded. Instead of focusing on discovering
when (and how) summarization works, by itself and without
training, researchers have tended to explore how to train students to write better summaries (e.g., Friend, 2001; Hare &
Borchardt, 1984) or to examine other benefits of training the
skill of summarization. Still others have simply assumed that
summarization works, including it as a component in larger
interventions (e.g., Carr, Bigler, & Morningstar, 1991; Lee,
Lim, & Grabowski, 2010; Palincsar & Brown, 1984; Spörer,
Brunstein, & Kieschke, 2009). When collapsing across findings pertaining to all forms of summarization, summarization
appears to benefit students, but the evidence for any one
instantiation of the strategy is less compelling.
The focus on training students to summarize reflects the
belief that the quality of summaries matters. If a summary does
not emphasize the main points of a text, or if it includes incorrect information, why would it be expected to benefit learning
and retention? Consider a study by Bednall and Kehoe (2011,
Experiment 2), in which undergraduates studied six Web units
that explained different logical fallacies and provided examples
of each. Of interest for present purposes are two groups: a control group who simply read the units and a group in which students were asked to summarize the material as if they were
explaining it to a friend. Both groups received the following
tests: a multiple-choice quiz that tested information directly
stated in the Web unit; a short-answer test in which, for each of
a list of presented statements, students were required to name
the specific fallacy that had been committed or write “not a fallacy” if one had not occurred; and, finally, an application test
that required students to write explanations of logical fallacies
in examples that had been studied (near transfer) as well as
explanations of fallacies in novel examples (far transfer). Summarization did not benefit overall performance, but the researchers noticed that the summaries varied a lot in content; for one
studied fallacy, only 64% of the summaries included the correct
definition. Table 3 shows the relationships between summary
content and later performance. Higher-quality summaries that
contained more information and that were linked to prior knowledge were associated with better performance.
Several other studies have supported the claim that the
quality of summaries has consequences for later performance.
Most similar to the Bednall and Kehoe (2011) result is Ross
and Di Vesta’s (1976) finding that the length (in words) of an
oral summary (a very rough indicator of quality) correlated
with later performance on multiple-choice and short-answer
questions. Similarly, Dyer, Riley, and Yekovich (1979) found
that final-test questions were more likely to be answered correctly if the information needed to answer them had been
included in an earlier summary. Garner (1982) used a different
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
Immediate Test Delayed Test
Number Correct (out of 25)
Summarization
Note-Taking
Verbatim
Letter Search
Control
Fig. 3. Mean number of correct responses on a test occurring shortly
after study as a function of test type (immediate or delayed) and learning
condition in Bretzing and Kulhavy (1979). Error bars represent standard
errors.
16 Dunlosky et al.
method to show that the quality of summaries matters: Undergraduates read a passage on Dutch elm disease and then wrote
a summary at the bottom of the page. Five days later, the students took an old/new recognition test; critical items were new
statements that captured the gist of the passage (as in Bransford & Franks, 1971). Students who wrote better summaries
(i.e., summaries that captured more important information)
were more likely to falsely recognize these gist statements, a
pattern suggesting that the students had extracted a higherlevel understanding of the main ideas of the text.
3.2 How general are the effects of summarization?
3.2a Learning conditions. As noted already, many different
types of summaries can influence learning and retention; summarization can be simple, requiring the generation of only a
heading (e.g., L. W. Brooks et al., 1983) or a single sentence
per paragraph of a text (e.g., Doctorow et al., 1978), or it can be
as complicated as an oral presentation on an entire set of studied material (e.g., Ross & Di Vesta, 1976). Whether it is better
to summarize smaller pieces of a text (more frequent summarization) or to capture more of the text in a larger summary (less
frequent summarization) has been debated (Foos, 1995; Spurlin, Dansereau, O’Donnell, & Brooks, 1988). The debate
remains unresolved, perhaps because what constitutes the most
effective summary for a text likely depends on many factors
(including students’ ability and the nature of the material).
One other open question involves whether studied material
should be present during summarization. Hidi and Anderson
(1986) pointed out that having the text present might help the
reader to succeed at identifying its most important points as
well as relating parts of the text to one another. However, summarizing a text without having it present involves retrieval,
which is known to benefit memory (see the Practice Testing
section of this monograph), and also prevents the learner from
engaging in verbatim copying. The Dyer et al. (1979) study
described earlier involved summarizing without the text present; in this study, no overall benefit from summarizing
occurred, even though information that had been included in
summaries was benefited (overall, this benefit was overshadowed by costs to the greater amount of information that had
not been included in summaries). More generally, some studies have shown benefits from summarizing an absent text
(e.g., Ross & Di Vesta, 1976), but some have not (e.g., M. C.
M. Anderson & Thiede, 2008, and Thiede & Anderson, 2003,
found no benefits of summarization on test performance). The
answer to whether studied text should be present during summarization is most likely a complicated one, and it may depend
on people’s ability to summarize when the text is absent.
3.2b Student characteristics. Benefits of summarization have
primarily been observed with undergraduates. Most of the
research on individual differences has focused on the age of
students, because the ability to summarize develops with age.
Younger students struggle to identify main ideas and tend to
write lower-quality summaries that retain more of the original
wording and structure of a text (e.g., A. L. Brown & Day,
1983; A. L. Brown, Day, & Jones, 1983). However, younger
students (e.g., middle school students) can benefit from summarization following extensive training (e.g., Armbruster,
Anderson, & Ostertag, 1987; Bean & Steenwyk, 1984). For
example, consider a successful program for sixth-grade students (Rinehart, Stahl, & Erickson, 1986). Teachers received
90 minutes of training so that they could implement summarization training in their classrooms; students then completed
five 45- to 50-minute sessions of training. The training
reflected principles of direct instruction, meaning that students
were explicitly taught about the strategy, saw it modeled, practiced it and received feedback, and eventually learned to monitor and check their work. Students who had received the
training recalled more major information from a textbook
chapter (i.e., information identified by teachers as the most
important for students to know) than did students who had not,
and this benefit was linked to improvements in note-taking.
Similar training programs have succeeded with middle school
students who are learning disabled (e.g., Gajria & Salvia,
1992; Malone & Mastropieri, 1991), minority high school students (Hare & Borchardt, 1984), and underprepared college
students (A. King, 1992).
Outcomes of two other studies have implications for the
generality of the summarization strategy, as they involve individual differences in summarization skill (a prerequisite for
Table 3. Correlations between Measures of Summary Quality and Later Test Performance (from
Bednall & Kehoe, 2011, Experiment 2)
Test
Measure of summary quality
Multiple-choice test
(factual knowledge)
Short-answer test
(identification) Application test
Number of correct definitions .42* .43* .52*
Amount of extra information .31* .21* .40*
Note. Asterisks indicate correlations significantly greater than 0. “Amount of extra information” refers to the
number of summaries in which a student included information that had not been provided in the studied material (e.g., an extra example).
Improving Student Achievement 17
using the strategy). First, both general writing skill and interest
in a topic have been linked to summarization ability in seventh
graders (Head, Readence, & Buss, 1989). Writing skill was
measured via performance on an unrelated essay, and interest
in the topic (American history) was measured via a survey that
asked students how much they would like to learn about each
of 25 topics. Of course, interest may be confounded with
knowledge about a topic, and knowledge may also contribute
to summarization skill. Recht and Leslie (1988) showed that
seventh- and eighth-grade students who knew a lot about baseball (as measured by a pretest) were better at summarizing a
625-word passage about a baseball game than were students
who knew less about baseball. This finding needs to be replicated with different materials, but it seems plausible that students with more domain-relevant knowledge would be better
able to identify the main points of a text and extract its gist.
The question is whether domain experts would benefit from
the summarization strategy or whether it would be redundant
with the processing in which these students would spontaneously engage.
3.2c Materials. The majority of studies have used prose passages on such diverse topics as a fictitious primitive tribe, desert life, geology, the blue shark, an earthquake in Lisbon, the
history of Switzerland, and fictional stories. These passages
have ranged in length from a few hundred words to a few thousand words. Other materials have included Web modules and
lectures. For the most part, characteristics of materials have
not been systematically manipulated, which makes it difficult
to draw strong conclusions about this factor, even though 15
years have passed since Hidi and Anderson (1986) made an
argument for its probable importance. As discussed in Yu
(2009), it makes sense that the length, readability, and organization of a text might all influence a reader’s ability to summarize it, but these factors need to be investigated in studies
that manipulate them while holding all other factors constant
(as opposed to comparing texts that vary along multiple
dimensions).
3.2d Criterion tasks. The majority of summarization studies
have examined the effects of summarization on either retention of factual details or comprehension of a text (often requiring inferences) through performance on multiple-choice
questions, cued recall questions, or free recall. Other benefits
of summarization include enhanced metacognition (with textabsent summarization improving the extent to which readers
can accurately evaluate what they do or do not know; M. C. M.
Anderson & Thiede, 2008; Thiede & Anderson, 2003) and
improved note-taking following training (A. King, 1992;
Rinehart et al., 1986).
Whereas several studies have shown benefits of summarization (sometimes following training) on measures of application (e.g., B. Y. L. Wong, Wong, Perry, & Sawatsky, 1986),
others have failed to find such benefits. For example, consider
a study in which L. F. Annis (1985) had undergraduates read a
passage on an earthquake and then examined the consequences
of summarization for performance on questions designed to
tap different categories of learning within Bloom et al.’s
(1956) taxonomy. One week after learning, students who had
summarized performed no differently than students in a control group who had only read the passages in answering questions that tapped a basic level of knowledge (fact and
comprehension questions). Students benefited from summarization when the questions required the application or analysis
of knowledge, but summarization led to worse performance on
evaluation and synthesis questions. These results need to be
replicated, but they highlight the need to assess the consequences of summarization on the performance of tasks that
measure various levels of Bloom’s taxonomy.
Across studies, results have also indicated that summarization helps later performance on generative measures (e.g., free
recall, essays) more than it affects performance on multiplechoice or other measures that do not require the student to produce information (e.g., Bednall & Kehoe, 2011; L. W. Brooks
et al., 1983; J. R. King, Biggs, & Lipsky, 1984). Because summarizing requires production, the processing involved is likely
a better match to generative tests than to tests that depend on
recognition.
Unfortunately, the one study we found that used a highstakes test did not show a benefit from summarization training
(Brozo, Stahl, & Gordon, 1985). Of interest for present purposes were two groups in the study, which was conducted with
college students in a remedial reading course who received
training either in summarization or in self-questioning (in the
self-questioning condition, students learned to write multiplechoice comprehension questions). Training lasted for 4 weeks;
each week, students received approximately 4 to 5 hours of
instruction and practice that involved applying the techniques
to 1-page news articles. Of interest was the students’ performance on the Georgia State Regents’ examination, which
involves answering multiple-choice reading-comprehension
questions about passages; passing this exam is a graduation
requirement for many college students in the University System of Georgia (see Students
also took a practice test before taking the actual Regents’ exam.
Unfortunately, the mean scores for both groups were at or
below passing, for both the practice and actual exams. However, the self-questioning group performed better than the summarization group on both the practice test and the actual
Regents’ examination. This study did not report pretraining
scores and did not include a no-training control group, so some
caution is warranted in interpreting the results. However, it
emphasizes the need to establish that outcomes from basic laboratory work generalize to actual educational contexts and suggests that summarization may not have the same influence in
both contexts.
Finally, concerning test delays, several studies have indicated that when summarization does boost performance, its
effects are relatively robust over delays of days or weeks (e.g.,
Bretzing & Kulhavy, 1979; B. L. Stein & Kirby, 1992). Similarly, benefits of training programs have persisted several
weeks after the end of training (e.g., Hare & Borchardt, 1984).
18 Dunlosky et al.
3.3 Effects in representative educational contexts. Several of the large summarization-training studies have been
conducted in regular classrooms, indicating the feasibility of
doing so. For example, the study by A. King (1992) took place
in the context of a remedial study-skills course for undergraduates, and the study by Rinehart et al. (1986) took place in
sixth-grade classrooms, with the instruction led by students’
regular teachers. In these and other cases, students benefited
from the classroom training. We suspect it may actually be
more feasible to conduct these kinds of training studies in
classrooms than in the laboratory, given the nature of the time
commitment for students. Even some of the studies that did
not involve training were conducted outside the laboratory; for
example, in the Bednall and Kehoe (2011) study on learning
about logical fallacies from Web modules (see data in Table 3),
the modules were actually completed as a homework assignment. Overall, benefits can be observed in classroom settings;
the real constraint is whether students have the skill to successfully summarize, not whether summarization occurs in the
lab or the classroom.
3.4 Issues for implementation. Summarization would be
feasible for undergraduates or other learners who already
know how to summarize. For these students, summarization
would constitute an easy-to-implement technique that would
not take a lot of time to complete or understand. The only
concern would be whether these students might be better
served by some other strategy, but certainly summarization
would be better than the study strategies students typically
favor, such as highlighting and rereading (as we discuss in the
sections on those strategies below). A trickier issue would
concern implementing the strategy with students who are not
skilled summarizers. Relatively intensive training programs
are required for middle school students or learners with learning disabilities to benefit from summarization. Such efforts
are not misplaced; training has been shown to benefit performance on a range of measures, although the training procedures do raise practical issues (e.g., Gajria & Salvia, 1992:
6.5–11 hours of training used for sixth through ninth graders
with learning disabilities; Malone & Mastropieri, 1991: 2
days of training used for middle school students with learning
disabilities; Rinehart et al., 1986: 45–50 minutes of instruction per day for 5 days used for sixth graders). Of course,
instructors may want students to summarize material because
summarization itself is a goal, not because they plan to use
summarization as a study technique, and that goal may merit
the efforts of training.
However, if the goal is to use summarization as a study
technique, our question is whether training students would be
worth the amount of time it would take, both in terms of the
time required on the part of the instructor and in terms of the
time taken away from students’ other activities. For instance,
in terms of efficacy, summarization tends to fall in the middle
of the pack when compared to other techniques. In direct
comparisons, it was sometimes more useful than rereading
(Rewey, Dansereau, & Peel, 1991) and was as useful as notetaking (e.g., Bretzing & Kulhavy, 1979) but was less powerful
than generating explanations (e.g., Bednall & Kehoe, 2011) or
self-questioning (A. King, 1992).
3.5 Summarization: Overall assessment. On the basis of the
available evidence, we rate summarization as low utility. It can
be an effective learning strategy for learners who are already
skilled at summarizing; however, many learners (including
children, high school students, and even some undergraduates)
will require extensive training, which makes this strategy less
feasible. Our enthusiasm is further dampened by mixed findings regarding which tasks summarization actually helps.
Although summarization has been examined with a wide
range of text materials, many researchers have pointed to factors of these texts that seem likely to moderate the effects of
summarization (e.g., length), and future research should be
aimed at investigating such factors. Finally, although many
studies have examined summarization training in the classroom, what are lacking are classroom studies examining the
effectiveness of summarization as a technique that boosts students’ learning, comprehension, and retention of course
content.
4 Highlighting and underlining
Any educator who has examined students’ course materials is
familiar with the sight of a marked-up, multicolored textbook.
More systematic evaluations of actual textbooks and other student materials have supported the claim that highlighting and
underlining are common behaviors (e.g., Bell & Limber, 2010;
Lonka, Lindblom-Ylänne, & Maury, 1994; Nist & Kirby,
1989). When students themselves are asked about what they
do when studying, they commonly report underlining, highlighting, or otherwise marking material as they try to learn it
(e.g., Cioffi, 1986; Gurung, Weidert, & Jeske, 2010). We treat
these techniques as equivalent, given that, conceptually, they
should work the same way (and at least one study found no
differences between them; Fowler & Barker, 1974, Experiment 2). The techniques typically appeal to students because
they are simple to use, do not entail training, and do not require
students to invest much time beyond what is already required
for reading the material. The question we ask here is, will a
technique that is so easy to use actually help students learn? To
understand any benefits specific to highlighting and underlining (for brevity, henceforth referred to as highlighting), we do
not consider studies in which active marking of text was paired
with other common techniques, such as note-taking (e.g.,
Arnold, 1942; L. B. Brown & Smiley, 1978; Mathews, 1938).
Although many students report combining multiple techniques
(e.g., L. Annis & Davis, 1978; Wade, Trathen, & Schraw,
1990), each technique must be evaluated independently to discover which ones are crucial for success.
Improving Student Achievement 19
4.1 General description of highlighting and underlining
and why they should work. As an introduction to the relevant issues, we begin with a description of a prototypical
experiment. Fowler and Barker (1974, Exp. 1) had undergraduates read articles (totaling about 8,000 words) about boredom
and city life from Scientific American and Science. Students
were assigned to one of three groups: a control group, in which
they only read the articles; an active-highlighting group, in
which they were free to highlight as much of the texts as they
wanted; or a passive-highlighting group, in which they read
marked texts that had been highlighted by yoked participants
in the active-highlighting group. Everyone received 1 hour to
study the texts (time on task was equated across groups); students in the active-highlighting condition were told to mark
particularly important material. All subjects returned to the lab
1 week later and were allowed to review their original materials for 10 minutes before taking a 54-item multiple-choice
test. Overall, the highlighting groups did not outperform the
control group on the final test, a result that has unfortunately
been echoed in much of the literature (e.g., Hoon, 1974; Idstein
& Jenkins, 1972; Stordahl & Christensen, 1956).
However, results from more detailed analyses of performance in the two highlighting groups are informative about
what effects highlighting might have on cognitive processing.
First, within the active-highlighting group, performance was
better on test items for which the relevant text had been highlighted (see Blanchard & Mikkelson, 1987; L. L. Johnson,
1988 for similar results). Second, this benefit to highlighted
information was greater for the active highlighters (who
selected what to highlight) than for passive highlighters (who
saw the same information highlighted, but did not select it).
Third, this benefit to highlighted information was accompanied by a small cost on test questions probing information that
had not been highlighted.
To explain such findings, researchers often point to a basic
cognitive phenomenon known as the isolation effect, whereby
a semantically or phonologically unique item in a list is much
better remembered than its less distinctive counterparts (see
Hunt, 1995, for a description of this work). For instance, if
students are studying a list of categorically related words (e.g.,
“desk,” “bed,” “chair,” “table”) and a word from a different
category (e.g., “cow”) is presented, the students will later be
more likely to recall it than they would if it had been studied in
a list of categorically related words (e.g., “goat,” “pig,”
“horse,” “chicken”). The analogy to highlighting is that a
highlighted, underlined, or capitalized sentence will “pop out”
of the text in the same way that the word “cow” would if it
were isolated in a list of words for types of furniture. Consistent with this expectation, a number of studies have shown that
reading marked text promotes later memory for the marked
material: Students are more likely to remember things that the
experimenter highlighted or underlined in the text (e.g.,
Cashen & Leicht, 1970; Crouse & Idstein, 1972; Hartley,
Bartlett, & Branthwaite, 1980; Klare, Mabry, & Gustafson,
1955; see Lorch, 1989 for a review).
Actively selecting information should benefit memory
more than simply reading marked text (given that the former
would capitalize on the benefits of generation, Slamecka &
Graf, 1978, and active processing more generally, Faw &
Waller, 1976). Marked text draws the reader’s attention, but
additional processing should be required if the reader has to
decide which material is most important. Such decisions
require the reader to think about the meaning of the text and
how its different pieces relate to one another (i.e., organizational processing; Hunt & Worthen, 2006). In the Fowler and
Barker (1974) experiment, this benefit was reflected in the
greater advantage for highlighted information among active
highlighters than among passive recipients of the same highlighted text. However, active highlighting is not always better
than receiving material that has already been highlighted by an
experimenter (e.g., Nist & Hogrebe, 1987), probably because
experimenters will usually be better than students at highlighting the most important parts of a text.
More generally, the quality of the highlighting is likely crucial to whether it helps students to learn (e.g., Wollen, Cone,
Britcher, & Mindemann, 1985), but unfortunately, many studies have not contained any measure of the amount or the
appropriateness of students’ highlighting. Those studies that
have examined the amount of marked text have found great
variability in what students actually mark, with some students
marking almost nothing and others marking almost everything
(e.g., Idstein & Jenkins, 1972). Some intriguing data came
from the active-highlighting group in Fowler and Barker
(1974). Test performance was negatively correlated (r = –.29)
with the amount of text that had been highlighted in the activehighlighting group, although this result was not significant
given the small sample size (n = 19).
Marking too much text is likely to have multiple consequences. First, overmarking reduces the degree to which
marked text is distinguished from other text, and people are
less likely to remember marked text if it is not distinctive
(Lorch, Lorch, & Klusewitz, 1995). Second, it likely takes less
processing to mark a lot of text than to single out the most
important details. Consistent with this latter idea, benefits of
marking text may be more likely to be observed when experimenters impose explicit limits on the amount of text students
are allowed to mark. For example, Rickards and August (1975)
found that students limited to underlining a single sentence per
paragraph later recalled more of a science text than did a nounderlining control group. Similarly, L. L. Johnson (1988)
found that marking one sentence per paragraph helped college
students in a reading class to remember the underlined information, although it did not translate into an overall benefit.
4.2 How general are the effects of highlighting and underlining? We have outlined hypothetical mechanisms by which
highlighting might aid memory, and particular features of
highlighting that would be necessary for these mechanisms to
be effective (e.g., highlighting only important material). However, most studies have shown no benefit of highlighting (as it 
20 Dunlosky et al.
is typically used) over and above the benefit of simply reading,
and thus the question concerning the generality of the benefits
of highlighting is largely moot. Because the research on highlighting has not been particularly encouraging, few investigations have systematically evaluated the factors that might
moderate the effectiveness of the technique—for instance, we
could not include a Learning Conditions (4.2a) subsection
below, given the lack of relevant evidence. To the extent the
literature permits, we sketch out the conditions known to moderate the effectiveness of highlighting. We also describe how
our conclusion about the relative ineffectiveness of this technique holds across a wide range of situations.
4.2b Student characteristics. Highlighting has failed to help
Air Force basic trainees (Stordahl & Christensen, 1956), children (e.g., Rickards & Denner, 1979), and remedial students
(i.e., students who scored an average of 390 on the SAT verbal
section; Nist & Hogrebe, 1987), as well as prototypical undergraduates (e.g., Todd & Kessler, 1971). It is possible that these
groups struggled to highlight only relevant text, given that
other studies have suggested that most undergraduates overmark text. Results from one study with airmen suggested that
prior knowledge might moderate the effectiveness of highlighting. In particular, the airmen read a passage on aircraft
engines that either was unmarked (control condition) or had
key information underlined (Klare et al., 1955). The experimenters had access to participants’ previously measured
mechanical-aptitude scores and linked performance in the
experiment to those scores. The marked text was more helpful
to airmen who had received high scores. This study involved
premarked texts and did not examine what participants would
have underlined on their own, but it seems likely that students
with little knowledge of a topic would struggle to identify
which parts of a text were more or less important (and thus
would benefit less from active highlighting than knowledgeable students would).
One other interesting possibility has come from a study in
which experimenters extrinsically motivated participants by
promising them that the top scorers on an exam would receive
$5 (Fass & Schumacher, 1978). Participants read a text about
enzymes; half the participants were told to underline key
words and phrases. All participants then took a 15-item multiple-choice test. A benefit from underlining was observed
among students who could earn the $5 bonus, but not among
students in a control group. Thus, although results from this
single study need to be replicated, it does appear that some
students may have the ability to highlight effectively, but do
not always do so.
4.2c Materials. Similar conclusions about marking text have
come from studies using a variety of different text materials on
topics as diverse as aerodynamics, ancient Greek schools,
aggression, and Tanzania, ranging in length from a few hundred words to a few thousand. Todd and Kessler (1971)
manipulated text length (all of the materials were relatively
short, with lengths of 44, 140, or 256 words) and found that
underlining was ineffective regardless of the text length. Fass
and Schumacher (1978) manipulated whether a text about
enzymes was easy or difficult to read; the easy version was at
a seventh-grade reading level, whereas the difficult version
was at high school level and contained longer sentences. A
larger difference between the highlighting and control groups
was found for performance on multiple-choice tests for the
difficult text as opposed to the easy text.
4.2d Criterion tasks. A lack of benefit from highlighting has
been observed on both immediate and delayed tests, with
delays ranging from 1 week to 1 month. A variety of dependent measures have been examined, including free recall, factual multiple-choice questions, comprehension multiple-choice
questions, and sentence-completion tests.
Perhaps most concerning are results from a study that suggested that underlining can be detrimental to later ability to
make inferences. Peterson (1992) had education majors read
a 10,000-word chapter from a history textbook; two groups
underlined while studying for 90 minutes, whereas a third
group was allowed only to read the chapter. One week later,
all groups were permitted to review the material for 15 minutes prior to taking a test on it (the two underlining groups
differed in whether they reviewed a clean copy of the original
text or one containing their underlining). Everyone received
the same test again 2 months later, without having another
chance to review the text. The multiple-choice test consisted
of 20 items that probed facts (and could be linked to specific
references in the text) and 20 items that required inferences
(which would have to be based on connections across the text
and could not be linked to specific, underlined information).
The three groups performed similarly on the factual questions, but students who had underlined (and reviewed their
marked texts) were at a disadvantage on the inference questions. This pattern of results requires replication and extension, but one possible explanation for it is that standard
underlining draws attention more to individual concepts (supporting memory for facts) than to connections across concepts (as required by the inference questions). Consistent
with this idea, in another study, underliners who expected that
a final test would be in a multiple-choice format scored higher
on it than did underliners who expected it to be in a shortanswer format (Kulhavy, Dyer, & Silver, 1975), regardless of
the actual format of the final-test questions. Underlined information may naturally line up with the kinds of information
students expect on multiple-choice tests (e.g., S. R. Schmidt,
1988), but students may be less sure about what to underline
when studying for a short-answer test.
4.5 Effects in representative educational contexts. As
alluded to at the beginning of this section, surveys of actual
textbooks and other student materials have supported the
frequency of highlighting and underlining in educational
contexts (e.g., Bell & Limber, 2010; Lonka et al., 1994). Less
clear are the consequences of such real-world behaviors.
Classroom studies have examined whether instructor-provided
markings affect examination performance. For example, 
Improving Student Achievement 21
Cashen and Leicht (1970) had psychology students read Scientific American articles on animal learning, suicide, and
group conflict, each of which contained five critical statements, which were underlined in red for half of the students.
The articles were related to course content but were not covered in lectures. Exam scores on items related to the critical
statements were higher when the statements had been underlined in red than when they had not. Interestingly, students in
the underlining condition also scored better on exam questions
about information that had been in sentences adjacent to the
critical statements (as opposed to scoring worse on questions
about nonunderlined information). The benefit to underlined
items was replicated in another psychology class (Leicht &
Cashen, 1972), although the effects were weaker. However, it
is unclear whether the results from either of these studies
would generalize to a situation in which students were in
charge of their own highlighting, because they would likely
mark many more than five statements in an article (and hence
would show less discrimination between important and trivial
information).
4.4 Issues for implementation. Students already are familiar
with and spontaneously adopt the technique of highlighting;
the problem is that the way the technique is typically implemented is not effective. Whereas the technique as it is typically used is not normally detrimental to learning (but see
Peterson, 1992, for a possible exception), it may be problematic to the extent that it prevents students from engaging in
other, more productive strategies.
One possibility that should be explored is whether students
could be trained to highlight more effectively. We located
three studies focused on training students to highlight. In two
of these cases, training involved one or more sessions in which
students practiced reading texts to look for main ideas before
marking any text. Students received feedback about practice
texts before marking (and being tested on) the target text, and
training improved performance (e.g., Amer, 1994; Hayati &
Shariatifar, 2009). In the third case, students received feedback on their ability to underline the most important content in
a text; critically, students were instructed to underline as little
as possible. In one condition, students even lost points for
underlining extraneous material (Glover, Zimmer, Filbeck, &
Plake, 1980). The training procedures in all three cases
involved feedback, and they all had some safeguard against
overuse of the technique. Given students’ enthusiasm for highlighting and underlining (or perhaps overenthusiasm, given
that students do not always use the technique correctly), discovering fail-proof ways to ensure that this technique is used
effectively might be easier than convincing students to abandon it entirely in favor of other techniques.
4.5 Highlighting and underlining: Overall assessment. On
the basis of the available evidence, we rate highlighting and
underlining as having low utility. In most situations that have
been examined and with most participants, highlighting does
little to boost performance. It may help when students have the
knowledge needed to highlight more effectively, or when texts
are difficult, but it may actually hurt performance on higherlevel tasks that require inference making. Future research
should be aimed at teaching students how to highlight effectively, given that students are likely to continue to use this
popular technique despite its relative ineffectiveness.
5 The keyword mnemonic
Develop a mental image of students hunched over textbooks,
struggling with a science unit on the solar system, trying to
learn the planets’ names and their order in distance from the
sun. Or imagine students in a class on language arts, reading a
classic novel, trying to understand the motives of the main
characters and how they may act later in the story. By visualizing these students in your “mind’s eye,” you are using one of
the oldest strategies for enhancing learning—dating back to
the ancient Greeks (Yates, 1966)—and arguably a powerful
one: mental imagery. The earliest systematic research on
imagery was begun in the late 1800s by Francis Galton (for a
historical review, see Thompson, 1990); since then, many
debates have arisen about its nature (e.g., Kosslyn, 1981; Pylyshyn, 1981), such as whether its power accrues from the storage of dual codes (one imaginal and one propositional) or the
storage of a distinctive propositional code (e.g., Marschark &
Hunt, 1989), and whether mental imagery is subserved by the
same brain mechanisms as visual imagery (e.g., Goldenberg,
1998).
Few of these debates have been entirely resolved, but fortunately, their resolution is not essential for capitalizing on the
power of mental imagery. In particular, it is evident that the
use of imagery can enhance learning and comprehension for a
wide variety of materials and for students with various abilities. A review of this entire literature would likely go beyond a
single monograph or perhaps even a book, given that mental
imagery is one of the most highly investigated mental activities and has inspired enough empirical research to warrant its
own publication (i.e., the Journal of Mental Imagery). Instead
of an exhaustive review, we briefly discuss two specific uses
of mental imagery for improving student learning that have
been empirically scrutinized: the use of the keyword mnemonic for learning foreign-language vocabulary, and the use
of mental imagery for comprehending and learning text
materials.
5.1 General description of the keyword mnemonic and
why it works. Imagine a student struggling to learn French
vocabulary, including words such as la dent (tooth), la clef
(key), revenir (to come back), and mourir (to die). To facilitate
learning, the student uses the keyword mnemonic, which is a
technique based on interactive imagery that was developed by
Atkinson and Raugh (1975). To use this mnemonic, the student would first find an English word that sounds similar to
the foreign cue word, such as dentist for “la dent” or cliff for 
22 Dunlosky et al.
“la clef.” The student would then develop a mental image of
the English keyword interacting with the English translation.
So, for la dent–tooth, the student might imagine a dentist holding a large molar with a pair of pliers. Raugh and Atkinson
(1975) had college students use the keyword mnemonic to
learn Spanish-English vocabulary (e.g., gusano–worm): the
students first learned to associate each experimenter-provided
keyword with the appropriate Spanish cue (e.g., “gusano” is
associated with the keyword “goose”), and then they developed interactive images to associate the keywords with their
English translations. In a later test, the students were asked to
generate the English translation when presented with the
Spanish cue (e.g., “gusano”–?). Students who used the keyword mnemonic performed significantly better on the test than
did a control group of students who studied the translation
equivalents without keywords.
Beyond this first demonstration, the potential benefits of
the keyword mnemonic have been extensively explored, and
its power partly resides in the use of interactive images. In
particular, the interactive image involves elaboration that integrates the words meaningfully, and the images themselves
should help to distinguish the sought-after translation from
other candidates. For instance, in the example above, the
image of the “large molar” distinguishes “tooth” (the target)
from other candidates relevant to dentists (e.g., gums, drills,
floss). As we discuss next, the keyword mnemonic can be
effectively used by students of different ages and abilities for
a variety of materials. Nevertheless, our analysis of this literature also uncovered limitations of the keyword mnemonic that
may constrain its utility for teachers and students. Given these
limitations, we did not separate our review of the literature
into separate sections that pertain to each variable category
(Table 2) but instead provide a brief overview of the most relevant evidence concerning the generalizability of this
technique.
5.2 a–d How general are the effects of the keyword mnemonic? The benefits of the keyword mnemonic generalize to
many different kinds of material: (a) foreign-language vocabulary from a variety of languages (French, German, Italian,
Latin, Russian, Spanish, and Tagalog); (b) the definitions of
obscure English vocabulary words and science terms; (c) statecapital associations (e.g., Lincoln is the capital of Nebraska);
(d) medical terminology; (e) people’s names and accomplishments or occupations; and (f) minerals and their attributes (e.g.,
the mineral wolframite is soft, dark in color, and used in the
home). Equally impressive, the keyword mnemonic has also
been shown to benefit learners of different ages (from second
graders to college students) and students with learning disabilities (for a review, see Jitendra, Edwards, Sacks, & Jacobson,
2004). Although the bulk of research on the keyword mnemonic has focused on students’ retention of target materials,
the technique has also been shown to improve students’ performance on a variety of transfer tasks: It helps them (a) to generate appropriate sentences using newly learned English
vocabulary (McDaniel & Pressley, 1984) and (b) to adapt
newly acquired vocabulary to semantically novel contexts
(Mastropieri, Scruggs, & Mushinski Fulk, 1990).
The overwhelming evidence that the keyword mnemonic
can boost memory for many kinds of material and learners has
made it a relatively popular technique. Despite the impressive
outcomes, however, some aspects of these demonstrations
imply limits to the utility of the keyword mnemonic. First,
consider the use of this technique for its originally intended
domain—the learning of foreign-language vocabulary. In the
example above, la dent easily supports the development of a
concrete keyword (“dentist”) that can be easily imagined,
whereas many vocabulary terms are much less amenable to the
development and use of keywords. In the case of revenir (to
come back), a student could perhaps use the keyword
“revenge” (e.g., one might need “to come back” to taste its
sweetness), but imaging this abstract term would be difficult
and might even limit retention. Indeed, Hall (1988) found that
a control group (which received task practice but no specific
instructions on how to study) outperformed a keyword group
in a test involving English definitions that did not easily afford
keyword generation, even when the keywords were provided.
Proponents of the keyword mnemonic do acknowledge that its
benefits may be limited to keyword-friendly materials (e.g.,
concrete nouns), and in fact, the vast majority of the research
on the keyword mnemonic has involved materials that afforded
its use.
Second, in most studies, the keywords have been provided
by the experimenters, and in some cases, the interactive images
(in the form of pictures) were provided as well. Few studies
have directly examined whether students can successfully
generate their own keywords, and those that have have offered
mixed results: Sometimes students’ self-generated keywords
facilitate retention as well as experimenter-provided keywords
do (Shapiro & Waters, 2005), and sometimes they do not
(Shriberg, Levin, McCormick, & Pressley, 1982; Thomas &
Wang, 1996). For more complex materials (e.g., targets with
multiple attributes, as in the wolframite example above), the
experimenter-provided “keywords” were pictures, which
some students may have difficulties generating even after
extensive training. Finally, young students who have difficulties generating images appear to benefit from the keyword
mnemonic only if keywords and an associated interactive
image (in the form of a picture) are supplied during learning
(Pressley & Levin, 1978). Thus, although teachers who are
willing to construct appropriate keywords may find this mnemonic useful, even these teachers (and students) would be able
to use the technique only for subsets of target materials that are
keyword friendly.
Third, and perhaps most disconcerting, the keyword mnemonic may not produce durable retention. Some of the studies
investigating the long-term benefits of the keyword mnemonic
included a test soon after practice as well as one after a longer
delay of several days or even weeks (e.g., Condus, Marshall,
& Miller, 1986; Raugh & Atkinson, 1975). These studies 
Improving Student Achievement 23
generally demonstrated a benefit of keywords at the longer
delay (for a review, see Wang, Thomas, & Ouellette, 1992).
Unfortunately, these promising effects were compromised by
the experimental designs. In particular, all items were tested
on both the immediate and delayed tests. Given that the keyword mnemonic yielded better performance on the immediate
tests, this initial increase in successful recall could have
boosted performance on the delayed tests and thus inappropriately disadvantaged the control groups. Put differently, the
advantage in delayed test performance could have been largely
due to the effects of retrieval practice (i.e., from the immediate
test) and not to the use of keyword mnemonics per se (because
retrieval can slow forgetting; see the Practice Testing section
below).
This possibility was supported by data from Wang et al.
(1992; see also Wang & Thomas, 1995), who administered
immediate and delayed tests to different groups of students. As
shown in Figure 4 (top panel), for participants who received
the immediate test, the keyword-mnemonic group outperformed a rote-repetition control group. By contrast, this benefit vanished for participants who received only the delayed
test. Even more telling, as shown in the bottom panel of Figure
4, when the researchers equated the performance of the two
groups on the immediate test (by giving the rote-repetition
group more practice), performance on the delayed test was
significantly better for the rote-repetition group than for the
keyword-mnemonic group (Wang et al., 1992).
These data suggest that the keyword mnemonic leads to
accelerated forgetting. One explanation for this surprising outcome concerns decoding at retrieval: Students must decode
each image to retrieve the appropriate target, and at longer
delays, such decoding may be particularly difficult. For
instance, when a student retrieves “a dentist holding a large
molar with a pair of pliers,” he or she may have difficulty
deciding whether the target is “molar,” “tooth,” “pliers,” or
“enamel.”
5.3 Effects in representative educational contexts. The
keyword mnemonic has been implemented in classroom settings, and the outcomes have been mixed. On the promising
side, Levin, Pressley, McCormick, Miller, and Shriberg (1979)
had fifth graders use the keyword mnemonic to learn Spanish
vocabulary words that were keyword friendly. Students were
trained to use the mnemonic in small groups or as an entire
class, and in both cases, the groups who used the keyword
mnemonic performed substantially better than did control
groups who were encouraged to use their own strategies while
studying. Less promising are results for high school students
who Levin et al. (1979) trained to use the keyword mnemonic.
These students were enrolled in a 1st-year or 2nd-year language course, which is exactly the context in which one would
expect the keyword mnemonic to help. However, the keyword
mnemonic did not benefit recall, regardless of whether
students were trained individually or in groups. Likewise,
Willerman and Melvin (1979) did not find benefits of
keyword-mnemonic training for college students enrolled in
an elementary French course (cf. van Hell & Mahn, 1997; but
see Lawson & Hogben, 1998).
5.4 Issues for implementation. The majority of research on
the keyword mnemonic has involved at least some (and occasionally extensive) training, largely aimed at helping students
develop interactive images and use them to subsequently
retrieve targets. Beyond training, implementation also requires
the development of keywords, whether by students, teachers,
or textbook designers. The effort involved in generating some
keywords may not be the most efficient use of time for students (or teachers), particularly given that at least one easyto-use technique (i.e., retrieval practice, Fritz, Morris, Acton,
Voelkel, & Etkind, 2007) benefits retention as much as the
keyword mnemonic does.
22
20
18
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
20
18
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
0
Immediate Test Delayed Test
Mean Number Recalled
Keyword
Rote Repetition
Fig. 4. Mean number of items correctly recalled on a cued-recall test occurring soon after study (immediate test) or 1 week after study (delayed
test) in Wang, Thomas, and Ouellette (1992). Values in the top panel are
from Experiment 1, and those in the bottom panel are from Experiment 3.
Standard errors are not available.
24 Dunlosky et al.
5.5 The keyword mnemonic: Overall assessment. On the
basis of the literature reviewed above, we rate the keyword
mnemonic as low utility. We cannot recommend that the keyword mnemonic be widely adopted. It does show promise for
keyword-friendly materials, but it is not highly efficient (in
terms of time needed for training and keyword generation),
and it may not produce durable learning. Moreover, it is not
clear that students will consistently benefit from the keyword
mnemonic when they have to generate keywords; additional
research is needed to more fully explore the effectiveness of
keyword generation (at all age levels) and whether doing so is
an efficient use of students’ time, as compared to other strategies. In one head-to-head comparison, cued recall of foreignlanguage vocabulary was either no different after using the
keyword mnemonic (with experimenter-provided keywords)
than after practice testing, or was lower on delayed criterion
tests 1 week later (Fritz, Morris, Acton, et al., 2007). Given
that practice testing is easier to use and more broadly applicable (as reviewed below in the Practice Testing section), it
seems superior to the keyword mnemonic.
6 Imagery use for text learning
6.1 General description of imagery use and why it should
work. In one demonstration of the potential of imagery for
enhancing text learning, Leutner, Leopold, and Sumfleth
(2009) gave tenth graders 35 minutes to read a lengthy science
text on the dipole character of water molecules. Students either
were told to read the text for comprehension (control group) or
were told to read the text and to mentally imagine the content
of each paragraph using simple and clear mental images.
Imagery instructions were also crossed with drawing: Some
students were instructed to draw pictures that represented the
content of each paragraph, and others did not draw. Soon after
reading, the students took a multiple-choice test that included
questions for which the correct answer was not directly available from the text but needed to be inferred from it. As shown
in Figure 5, the instructions to mentally imagine the content of
each paragraph significantly boosted the comprehension-test
performance of students in the mental-imagery group, in comparison to students in the control group (Cohen’s d = 0.72).
This effect is impressive, especially given that (a) training was
not required, (b) the text involved complex science content,
and (c) the criterion test required learners to make inferences
about the content. Finally, drawing did not improve comprehension, and it actually negated the benefits of imagery
instructions. The potential for another activity to interfere with
the potency of imagery is discussed further in the subsection
on learning conditions (6.2a) below.
A variety of mechanisms may contribute to the benefits of
imaging text material on later test performance. Developing
images can enhance one’s mental organization or integration
of information in the text, and idiosyncratic images of particular referents in the text could enhance learning as well (cf. distinctive processing; Hunt, 2006). Moreover, using one’s prior
knowledge to generate a coherent representation of a narrative
may enhance a student’s general understanding of the text; if
so, the influence of imagery use may be robust across criterion
tasks that tap memory and comprehension. Despite these possibilities and the dramatic effect of imagery demonstrated by
Leutner et al. (2009), our review of the literature suggests that
the effects of using mental imagery to learn from text may be
rather limited and not robust.
6.2 How general are the effects of imagery use for text
learning? Investigations of imagery use for learning text
materials have focused on single sentences and longer text
materials. Evidence concerning the impact of imagery on sentence learning largely comes from investigations of other mnemonic techniques (e.g., elaborative interrogation) in which
imagery instructions have been included in a comparison condition. This research has typically demonstrated that groups
who receive imagery instructions have better memory for sentences than do no-instruction control groups (e.g., R. C.
Anderson & Hidde, 1971; Wood, Pressley, & Winne, 1990). In
the remainder of this section, we focus on the degree to which
imagery instructions improve learning for longer text
materials.
6.2a Learning conditions. Learning conditions play a potentially important role in moderating the benefits of imagery, so
we briefly discuss two conditions here—namely, the modality
of text presentation and learners’ actual use of imagery after
receiving imagery instructions. Modality pertains to whether
students are asked to use imagery as they read a text or as they
listen to a narration of a text. L. R. Brooks (1967, 1968)
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
No Drawing Drawing
Comprehension Performance (%)
Imagery
No Imagery
Fig. 5. Accuracy on a multiple-choice exam in which answers had to be
inferred from a text in Leutner, Leopold, and Sumfleth (2009). Participants
either did or did not receive instructions to use imagery while reading, and
either did or did not draw pictures to illustrate the content of the text.
Error bars represent standard errors.
Improving Student Achievement 25
reported that participants’ visualization of a pathway through a
matrix was disrupted when they had to read a description of it;
by contrast, visualization was not disrupted when participants
listened to the description. Thus, it is possible that the benefits
of imagery are not fully actualized when students read text and
would be most evident if they listened. Two observations are
relevant to this possibility. First, the majority of imagery
research has involved students reading texts; the fact that
imagery benefits have sometimes been found indicates that
reading does not entirely undermine imaginal processing. Second, in experiments in which participants either read or listened to a text, the results have been mixed. As expected,
imagery has benefited performance more among students who
have listened to texts than among students who have read them
(De Beni & Moè, 2003; Levin & Divine-Hawkins, 1974), but
in one case, imagery benefited performance similarly for both
modalities in a sample of fourth graders (Maher & Sullivan,
1982).
The actual use of imagery as a learning technique should
also be considered when evaluating the imagery literature. In
particular, even if students are instructed to use imagery, they
may not necessarily use it. For instance, R. C. Anderson and
Kulhavy (1972) had high school seniors read a lengthy text
passage about a fictitious primitive tribe; some students were
told to generate images while reading, whereas others were
told to read carefully. Imagery instructions did not influence
performance, but reported use of imagery was significantly
correlated with performance (see also Denis, 1982). The problem here is that some students who were instructed to use
imagery did not, whereas some uninstructed students spontaneously used it. Both circumstances would reduce the observed
effect of imagery instructions, and students’ spontaneous use
of imagery in control conditions may be partly responsible for
the failure of imagery to benefit performance in some cases.
Unfortunately, researchers have typically not measured imagery use, so evaluation of these possibilities must await further
research.
6.2b Student characteristics. The efficacy of imagery instructions have been evaluated across a wide range of student ages
and abilities. Consider data from studies involving fourth
graders, given that this particular grade level has been popular
in imagery research. In general, imagery instructions have
tended to boost criterion performance for fourth graders, but
even here the exceptions are noteworthy. For instance, imagery instructions boosted the immediate test performance of
fourth graders who studied short (e.g., 12-sentence) stories
that could be pictorially represented (e.g., Levin & DivineHawkins, 1974), but in some studies, this benefit was found
only for students who were biased to use imagery or for skilled
readers (Levin, Divine-Hawkins, Kerst, & Guttman, 1974).
For reading longer narratives (e.g., narratives of 400 words or
more), imagery instructions have significantly benefited fourth
graders’ free recall of text material (Gambrell & Jawitz, 1993;
Rasco, Tennyson, & Boutwell, 1975; see also Lesgold, McCormick, & Golinkoff, 1975) and performance on multiple-choice
questions about the text (Maher & Sullivan, 1982; this latter
benefit was apparent for both high- and low-skilled readers),
but even after extensive training and a reminder to use imagery, fourth graders’ performance on a standardized readingcomprehension test did not improve (Lesgold et al., 1975).
Despite the promise of imagery, this patchwork of inconsistent effects for fourth graders has also been found for students
of other ages. College students have been shown to reap the
benefits of imagery, but these benefits depend on the nature of
the criterion test (an issue we discuss below). In two studies,
high school students who read a long passage did not benefit
from imagery instructions (R. C. Anderson & Kulhavy, 1972;
Rasco et al., 1975). Studies with fifth and sixth grade students
have shown some benefits of imagery, but these trends have
not all been significant (Kulhavy & Swenson, 1975) and did
not arise on some criterion tests (e.g., standardized achievement tests; Miccinati, 1982). Third graders have been shown
to benefit from using imagery (Oakhill & Patel, 1991; Pressley, 1976), but younger students do not appear to benefit from
attempting to generate mental images when listening to a story
(Guttman, Levin, & Pressley, 1977).
6.2c Materials. Similar to studies on the keyword mnemonic, investigations of imagery use for text learning have
often used texts that are imagery friendly, such as narratives
that can be visualized or short stories that include concrete
terms. Across investigations, the specific texts have varied
widely and include long passages (of 2,000 words or more;
e.g., R. C. Anderson & Kulhavy, 1972; Giesen & Peeck, 1984),
relatively short stories (e.g., L. K. S. Chan, Cole, & Morris,
1990; Maher & Sullivan, 1982), and brief 10-sentence passages (Levin & Divine-Hawkins, 1974; Levin et al., 1974).
With regard to these variations in materials, the safest conclusion is that sometimes imagery instructions boost performance
and sometimes they do not. The literature is filled with interactions whereby imagery helped for one kind of material but not
for another kind of material. In these cases, failures to find an
effect for any given kind of material may not be due to the
material per se, but instead may reflect the effect of other,
uncontrolled factors, making it is impossible to tell which (if
any) characteristics of the materials predict whether imagery
will be beneficial.
Fortunately, some investigators have manipulated the content of text materials when examining the benefits of imagery
use. In De Beni and Moè (2003), one text included descriptions that were easy to imagine, another included a spatial
description of a pathway that was easy to imagine and verbalize, and another was abstract and presumably not easy to
imagine. As compared with instructions to just rehearse the
texts, instructions to use imagery benefited free recall of the
easy-to-imagine texts and the spatial texts but did not benefit
recall of the abstract texts. Moreover, the benefits were evident only when students listened to the text, not when they
read it (as discussed under “Learning Conditions,” 6.2a,
above). Thus, the benefits of imagery may be largely constrained to texts that directly support imaginal representations. 
26 Dunlosky et al.
Although the bulk of the research on imagery has used texts
that were specifically chosen to support imagery, two studies
have used the Metropolitan Achievement Test, which is a standardized test that taps comprehension. Both studies used
extensive training in the use of imagery while reading, and
both studies failed to find an effect of imagery training on test
performance (Lesgold, et al., 1975; Miccinati, 1982), even
when participants were explicitly instructed to use their trained
skills to complete the test (Lesgold et al., 1975).
6.2d Criterion tasks. The inconsistent benefits of imagery
within groups of students can in part be explained by interactions between imagery (vs. reading) instructions and the criterion task. Consider first the results from studies involving
college students. When the criterion test comprises free-recall
or short-answer questions tapping information explicitly stated
in the text, college students tend to benefit from instructions to
image (e.g., Gyeselinck, Meneghetti, De Beni, & Pazzaglia,
2009; Hodes, 1992; Rasco et al., 1975; although, as discussed
earlier, these effects may be smaller when students read the
passages rather than listen to them; De Beni & Moè, 2003). By
contrast, despite the fact that imagery presumably helps students develop an integrated visual model of a text, imagery
instructions did not significantly help college students answer
questions that required them to make inferences based on
information in a text (Giesen & Peeck, 1984) or comprehension questions about a passage on the human heart (Hodes,
1992).
This pattern is also apparent from studies with sixth graders, who do show significant benefits of imagery use on measures involving the recall or summarization of text information
(e.g., Kulhavy & Swenson, 1975), but show reduced or nonexistent benefits on comprehension tests and on criterion tests
that require application of the knowledge (Gagne & Memory,
1978; Miccinati, 1982). In general, imagery instructions tend
not to enhance students’ understanding or application of the
content of a text. One study demonstrated that training
improved 8- and 9-year-olds’ performance on inference questions, but in this case, training was extensive (three sessions),
which may not be practical in some settings.
When imagery instructions do improve criterion performance, a question arises as to whether these effects are long
lasting. Unfortunately, the question of whether the use of
imagery protects against the forgetting of text content has not
been widely investigated; in the majority of studies, criterion
tests have been administered immediately or shortly after the
target material was studied. In one exception, Kulhavy and
Swenson (1975) found that imagery instructions benefited
fifth and sixth graders’ accuracy in answering questions that
tapped the gist of the texts, and this effect was even apparent 1
week after the texts were initially read. The degree to which
these long-term benefits are robust and generalize across a
variety of criterion tasks is an open question.
6.3 Effects in representative educational contexts. Many
of the studies on imagery use and text learning have involved
students from real classrooms who were reading texts that
were written to match the students’ grade level. Most studies
have used fabricated materials, and few studies have used
authentic texts that students would read. Exceptions have
involved the use of a science text on the dipole character of
water molecules (Leutner et al., 2009) and texts on causeeffect relationships that were taken from real science and
social-science textbooks (Gagne & Memory, 1978); in both
cases, imagery instructions improved test performance
(although the benefits were limited to a free-recall test in the
latter case). Whether instructions to use imagery will help students learn materials in a manner that will translate into
improved course grades is unknown, and research investigating students’ performance on achievement tests has shown
imagery use to be a relatively inert strategy (Lesgold et al.,
1975; Miccinati, 1982; but see Rose, Parks, Androes, &
McMahon, 2000, who supplemented imagery by having students act out narrative stories).
6.4 Issues for implementation. The majority of studies have
examined the influence of imagery by using relatively brief
instructions that encouraged students to generate images of
text content while studying. Given that imagery does not
appear to undermine learning (and that it does boost performance in some conditions), teachers may consider instructing
students (third grade and above) to attempt to use imagery
when they are reading texts that easily lend themselves to imaginal representations. How much training would be required to
ensure that students consistently and effectively use imagery
under the appropriate conditions is unknown.
6.5 Imagery use for learning text: Overall assessment.
Imagery can improve students’ learning of text materials, and
the promising work by Leutner et al. (2009) speaks to the
potential utility of imagery use for text learning. Imagery production is also more broadly applicable than the keyword
mnemonic. Nevertheless, the benefits of imagery are largely
constrained to imagery-friendly materials and to tests of memory, and further demonstrations of the effectiveness of the
technique (across different criterion tests and educationally
relevant retention intervals) are needed. Accordingly, we rated
the use of imagery for learning text as low utility.
7 Rereading
Rereading is one of the techniques that students most frequently report using during self-regulated study (Carrier,
2003; Hartwig & Dunlosky, 2012; Karpicke, Butler, & Roediger, 2009; Kornell & Bjork, 2007; Wissman, Rawson, & Pyc,
2012). For example, Carrier (2003) surveyed college students
in an upper-division psychology course, and 65% reported
using rereading as a technique when preparing for course
exams. More recent surveys have reported similar results.
Kornell and Bjork (2007) and Hartwig and Dunlosky (2012)
asked students if they typically read a textbook, article, or 
Improving Student Achievement 27
other source material more than once during study. Across
these two studies, 18% of students reported rereading entire
chapters, and another 62% reported rereading parts or sections
of the material. Even high-performing students appear to use
rereading regularly. Karpicke et al. (2009) asked undergraduates at an elite university (where students’ average SAT scores
were above 1400) to list all of the techniques they used when
studying and then to rank them in terms of frequency of use.
Eighty-four percent of students included rereading textbook/
notes in their list, and rereading was also the top-ranked technique (listed as the most frequently used technique by 55% of
students). Students’ heavy reliance on rereading during selfregulated study raises an important question: Is rereading an
effective technique?
7.1 General description of rereading and why it should
work. In an early study by Rothkopf (1968), undergraduates
read an expository text (either a 1,500-word passage about
making leather or a 750-word passage about Australian history) zero, one, two, or four times. Reading was self-paced,
and rereading was massed (i.e., each presentation of a text
occurred immediately after the previous presentation). After
a 10-minute delay, a cloze test was administered in which
10% of the content words were deleted from the text and
students were to fill in the missing words. As shown in
Figure 6, performance improved as a function of number of
readings.
Why does rereading improve learning? Mayer (1983; Bromage & Mayer, 1986) outlined two basic accounts of rereading effects. According to the quantitative hypothesis, rereading
simply increases the total amount of information encoded,
regardless of the kind or level of information within the
text. In contrast, the qualitative hypothesis assumes that
rereading differentially affects the processing of higher-level
and lower-level information within a text, with particular
emphasis placed on the conceptual organization and processing of main ideas during rereading. To evaluate these hypotheses, several studies have examined free recall as a function of
the kind or level of text information. The results have been
somewhat mixed, but the evidence appears to favor the qualitative hypothesis. Although a few studies found that rereading
produced similar improvements in the recall of main ideas and
of details (a finding consistent with the quantitative hypothesis), several studies have reported greater improvement in the
recall of main ideas than in the recall of details (e.g., Bromage
& Mayer, 1986; Kiewra, Mayer, Christensen, Kim, & Risch,
1991; Rawson & Kintsch, 2005).
7.2 How general are the effects of rereading?
7.2a Learning conditions. Following the early work of Rothkopf (1968), subsequent research established that the effects
of rereading are fairly robust across other variations in learning conditions. For example, rereading effects obtain regardless of whether learners are forewarned that they will be given
the opportunity to study more than once, although Barnett and
Seefeldt (1989) found a small but significant increase in the
magnitude of the rereading effect among learners who were
forewarned, relative to learners who were not forewarned.
Furthermore, rereading effects obtain with both self-paced
reading and experimenter-paced presentation. Although most
studies have involved the silent reading of written material,
effects of repeated presentations have also been shown when
learners listen to an auditory presentation of text material (e.g.,
Bromage & Mayer, 1986; Mayer, 1983).2
One aspect of the learning conditions that does significantly
moderate the effects of rereading concerns the lag between initial reading and rereading. Although advantages of rereading
over reading only once have been shown with massed rereading and with spaced rereading (in which some amount of time
passes or intervening material is presented between initial
study and restudy), spaced rereading usually outperforms
massed rereading. However, the relative advantage of spaced
reading over massed rereading may be moderated by the
length of the retention interval, an issue that we discuss further
in the subsection on criterion tasks below (7.2d). The effect of
spaced rereading may also depend on the length of the lag
between initial study and restudy. In a recent study by Verkoeijen, Rikers, and Özsoy (2008), learners read a lengthy expository text and then reread it immediately afterward, 4 days later,
or 3.5 weeks later. Two days after rereading, all participants
completed a final test. Performance was greater for the group
who reread after a 4-day lag than for the massed rereaders,
whereas performance for the group who reread after a 3.5-
week lag was intermediate and did not significantly differ
from performance in either of the other two groups. With that
said, spaced rereading appears to be effective at least across
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
0124
Percent Correct Responses
Number of Readings
Fig. 6. Mean percentage of correct responses on a final cloze test for
learners who read an expository text zero, one, two, or four times in
Rothkopf (1968). Means shown are overall means for two conditions, one
in which learners read a 1,500-word text and one in which learners read
a 750-word text. Values are estimated from original figures in Rothkopf
(1968). Standard errors are not available.
28 Dunlosky et al.
moderate lags, with studies reporting significant effects after
lags of several minutes, 15–30 minutes, 2 days, and 1 week.
One other learning condition that merits mention is amount
of practice, or dosage. Most of the benefits of rereading over a
single reading appear to accrue from the second reading: The
majority of studies that have involved two levels of rereading
have shown diminishing returns from additional rereading trials. However, an important caveat is that all of these studies
involved massed rereading. The extent to which additional
spaced rereading trials produce meaningful gains in learning
remains an open question.
Finally, although learners in most experiments have studied
only one text, rereading effects have also been shown when
learners are asked to study several texts, providing suggestive
evidence that rereading effects can withstand interference
from other learning materials.
7.2b Student characteristics. The extant literature is severely
limited with respect to establishing the generality of rereading
effects across different groups of learners. To our knowledge,
all but two studies of rereading effects have involved undergraduate students. Concerning the two exceptions, Amlund,
Kardash, and Kulhavy (1986) reported rereading effects with
graduate students, and O’Shea, Sindelar, and O’Shea (1985)
reported effects with third graders.
The extent to which rereading effects depend on knowledge
level is also woefully underexplored. In the only study to date
that has provided any evidence about the extent to which
knowledge may moderate rereading effects (Arnold, 1942),
both high-knowledge and low-knowledge readers showed an
advantage of massed rereading over outlining or summarizing
a passage for the same amount of time. Additional suggestive
evidence that relevant background knowledge is not requisite
for rereading effects has come from three recent studies that
used the same text (Rawson, 2012; Rawson & Kintsch, 2005;
Verkoeijen et al., 2008) and found significant rereading effects
for learners with virtually no specific prior knowledge about
the main topics of the text (the charge of the Light Brigade in
the Crimean War and the Hollywood film portraying the event).
Similarly, few studies have examined rereading effects as a
function of ability, and the available evidence is somewhat
mixed. Arnold (1942) found an advantage of massed rereading
over outlining or summarizing a passage for the same amount
of time among learners with both higher and lower levels of
intelligence and both higher and lower levels of reading ability
(but see Callender & McDaniel, 2009, who did not find an
effect of massed rereading over single reading for either
higher- or lower-ability readers). Raney (1993) reported a similar advantage of massed rereading over a single reading for
readers with either higher or lower working-memory spans.
Finally, Barnett and Seefeldt (1989) defined high- and lowability groups by a median split of ACT scores; both groups
showed an advantage of massed rereading over a single reading for short-answer factual questions, but only high-ability
learners showed an effect for questions that required application of the information.
7.2c Materials. Rereading effects are robust across variations in the length and content of text material. Although most
studies have used expository texts, rereading effects have also
been shown for narratives. Those studies involving expository
text material have used passages of considerably varying
lengths, including short passages (e.g., 99–125 words), intermediate passages (e.g., 390–750 words), lengthy passages
(e.g., 900–1,500 words), and textbook chapters or magazine
articles with several thousand words. Additionally, a broad
range of content domains and topics have been covered—an
illustrative but nonexhaustive list includes physics (e.g.,
Ohm’s law), law (e.g., legal principles of evidence), history
(e.g., the construction of the Brooklyn Bridge), technology
(e.g., how a camera exposure meter works), biology (e.g.,
insects), geography (e.g., of Africa), and psychology (e.g., the
treatment of mental disorders).
7.2d Criterion tasks. Across rereading studies, the most commonly used outcome measure has been free recall, which has
consistently shown effects of both massed and spaced rereading with very few exceptions. Several studies have also shown
rereading effects on cue-based recall measures, such as fill-inthe-blank tests and short-answer questions tapping factual
information. In contrast, the effects of rereading on recognition are less certain, with weak or nonexistent effects on sentence-verification tasks and multiple-choice questions tapping
information explicitly stated in the text (Callender & McDaniel, 2009; Dunlosky & Rawson, 2005; Hinze & Wiley, 2011;
Kardash & Scholes, 1995). The evidence concerning the
effects of rereading on comprehension is somewhat muddy.
Although some studies have shown positive effects of rereading on answering problem-solving essay questions (Mayer,
1983) and short-answer application or inference questions
(Karpicke & Blunt, 2011; Rawson & Kintsch, 2005), other
studies using application or inference-based questions have
reported effects only for higher-ability students (Barnett &
Seefeldt, 1989) or no effects at all (Callender & McDaniel,
2009; Dunlosky & Rawson, 2005; Durgunoğlu, Mir, & AriñoMartí, 1993; Griffin, Wiley, & Thiede, 2008).
Concerning the durability of learning, most of the studies
that have shown significant rereading effects have administered criterion tests within a few minutes after the final study
trial, and most of these studies reported an advantage of
massed rereading over a single reading. The effects of massed
rereading after longer delays are somewhat mixed. Agarwal,
Karpicke, Kang, Roediger, and McDermott (2008; see also
Karpicke & Blunt, 2011) reported massed rereading effects
after 1 week, but other studies have failed to find significant
effects after 1–2 days (Callender & McDaniel, 2009; Cranney,
Ahn, McKinnon, Morris, & Watts, 2009; Hinze & Wiley,
2011; Rawson & Kintsch, 2005).
Fewer studies have involved spaced rereading, although a
relatively consistent advantage for spaced rereading over a
single reading has been shown both on immediate tests and on
tests administered after a 2-day delay. Regarding the comparison of massed rereading with spaced rereading, neither 
Improving Student Achievement 29
schedule shows a consistent advantage on immediate tests. A
similar number of studies have shown an advantage of spacing
over massing, an advantage of massing over spacing, and no
differences in performance. In contrast, spaced rereading consistently outperforms massed rereading on delayed tests. We
explore the benefits of spacing more generally in the Distributed Practice section below.
7.3 Effects in representative educational contexts. Given
that rereading is the study technique that students most commonly report using, it is perhaps ironic that no experimental
research has assessed its impact on learning in educational
contexts. Although many of the topics of the expository texts
used in rereading research are arguably similar to those that
students might encounter in a course, none of the aforementioned studies have involved materials taken from actual
course content. Furthermore, none of the studies were administered in the context of a course, nor have any of the outcome
measures involved course-related tests. The only available
evidence involves correlational findings reported in survey
studies, and it is mixed. Carrier (2003) found a nonsignificant
negative association between self-reported rereading of textbook chapters and exam performance but a significantly positive association between self-reported review of lecture notes
and exam performance. Hartwig and Dunlosky (2012) found a
small but significant positive association between self-reported
rereading of textbook chapters or notes and self-reported grade
point average, even after controlling for self-reported use of
other techniques.
7.4 Issues for implementation. One advantage of rereading
is that students require no training to use it, other than perhaps
being instructed that rereading is generally most effective
when completed after a moderate delay rather than immediately after an initial reading. Additionally, relative to some
other learning techniques, rereading is relatively economical
with respect to time demands (e.g., in those studies permitting
self-paced study, the amount of time spent rereading has typically been less than the amount of time spent during initial
reading). However, in head-to-head comparisons of learning
techniques, rereading has not fared well against some of the
more effective techniques discussed here. For example, direct
comparisons of rereading to elaborative interrogation, selfexplanation, and practice testing (described in the Practice
Testing section below) have consistently shown rereading to
be an inferior technique for promoting learning.
7.5 Rereading: Overall assessment. Based on the available
evidence, we rate rereading as having low utility. Although
benefits from rereading have been shown across a relatively
wide range of text materials, the generality of rereading effects
across the other categories of variables in Table 2 has not been
well established. Almost no research on rereading has involved
learners younger than college-age students, and an insufficient
amount of research has systematically examined the extent to
which rereading effects depend on other student characteristics, such as knowledge or ability. Concerning criterion tasks,
the effects of rereading do appear to be durable across at least
modest delays when rereading is spaced. However, most
effects have been shown with recall-based memory measures,
whereas the benefit for comprehension is less clear. Finally,
although rereading is relatively economical with respect to
time demands and training requirements when compared with
some other learning techniques, rereading is also typically
much less effective. The relative disadvantage of rereading to
other techniques is the largest strike against rereading and is
the factor that weighed most heavily in our decision to assign
it a rating of low utility.
8 Practice testing
Testing is likely viewed by many students as an undesirable
necessity of education, and we suspect that most students
would prefer to take as few tests as possible. This view of testing is understandable, given that most students’ experience
with testing involves high-stakes summative assessments that
are administered to evaluate learning. This view of testing is
also unfortunate, because it overshadows the fact that testing
also improves learning. Since the seminal study by Abbott
(1909), more than 100 years of research has yielded several
hundred experiments showing that practice testing enhances
learning and retention (for recent reviews, see Rawson & Dunlosky, 2011; Roediger & Butler, 2011; Roediger, Putnam, &
Smith, 2011). Even in 1906, Edward Thorndike recommended
that “the active recall of a fact from within is, as a rule, better
than its impression from without” (p. 123, Thorndike, 1906).
The century of research on practice testing since then has supported Thorndike’s recommendation by demonstrating the
broad generalizability of the benefits of practice testing.
Note that we use the term practice testing here (a) to distinguish testing that is completed as a low-stakes or no-stakes
practice or learning activity outside of class from summative
assessments that are administered by an instructor in class, and
(b) to encompass any form of practice testing that students
would be able to engage in on their own. For example, practice
testing could involve practicing recall of target information via
the use of actual or virtual flashcards, completing practice
problems or questions included at the end of textbook chapters,
or completing practice tests included in the electronic supplemental materials that increasingly accompany textbooks.
8.1 General description of practice testing and why it
should work. As an illustrative example of the power of testing, Runquist (1983) presented undergraduates with a list of
word pairs for initial study. After a brief interval during which
participants completed filler tasks, half of the pairs were tested
via cued recall and half were not. Participants completed a
final cued-recall test for all pairs either 10 minutes or 1 week
later. Final-test performance was better for pairs that were
practice tested than pairs that were not (53% versus 36% after 
30 Dunlosky et al.
10 minutes, 35% versus 4% after 1 week). Whereas this study
illustrates the method of comparing performance between
conditions that do and do not involve a practice test, many
other studies have compared a practice-testing condition with
more stringent conditions involving additional presentations
of the to-be-learned information. For example, Roediger and
Karpicke (2006b) presented undergraduates with a short
expository text for initial study followed either by a second
study trial or by a practice free-recall test. One week later, free
recall was considerably better among the group that had taken
the practice test than among the group that had restudied (56%
versus 42%). As another particularly compelling demonstration of the potency of testing as compared with restudy, Karpicke and Roediger (2008) presented undergraduates with
Swahili-English translations for cycles of study and practice
cued recall until items were correctly recalled once. After the
first correct recall, items were presented only in subsequent
study cycles with no further testing, or only in subsequent test
cycles with no further study. Performance on a final test 1
week later was substantially greater after continued testing
(80%) than after continued study (36%).
Why does practice testing improve learning? Whereas a
wealth of studies have established the generality of testing
effects, theories about why it improves learning have lagged
behind. Nonetheless, theoretical accounts are increasingly
emerging to explain two different kinds of testing effects,
which are referred to as direct effects and mediated effects of
testing (Roediger & Karpicke, 2006a). Direct effects refer to
changes in learning that arise from the act of taking a test
itself, whereas mediated effects refer to changes in learning
that arise from an influence of testing on the amount or kind of
encoding that takes place after the test (e.g., during a subsequent restudy opportunity).
Concerning direct effects of practice testing, Carpenter
(2009) recently proposed that testing can enhance retention by
triggering elaborative retrieval processes. Attempting to
retrieve target information involves a search of long-term
memory that activates related information, and this activated
information may then be encoded along with the retrieved target, forming an elaborated trace that affords multiple pathways to facilitate later access to that information. In support of
this account, Carpenter (2011) had learners study weakly
related word pairs (e.g., “mother”–“child”) followed either by
additional study or a practice cued-recall test. On a later final
test, recall of the target word was prompted via a previously
unpresented but strongly related word (e.g., “father”). Performance was greater following a practice test than following
restudy, presumably because the practice test increased the
likelihood that the related information was activated and
encoded along with the target during learning.
Concerning mediated effects of practice testing, Pyc and
Rawson (2010, 2012b) proposed a similar account, according
to which practice testing facilitates the encoding of more
effective mediators (i.e., elaborative information connecting
cues and targets) during subsequent restudy opportunities. Pyc
and Rawson (2010) presented learners with Swahili-English
translations in an initial study block, which was followed by
three blocks of restudy trials; for half of the participants, each
restudy trial was preceded by practice cued recall. All learners
were prompted to generate and report a keyword mediator during each restudy trial. When tested 1 week later, compared
with students who had only restudied, students who had
engaged in practice cued recall were more likely to recall their
mediators when prompted with the cue word and were more
likely to recall the target when prompted with their mediator.
Recent evidence also suggests that practice testing may
enhance how well students mentally organize information and
how well they process idiosyncratic aspects of individual
items, which together can support better retention and test performance (Hunt, 1995, 2006). Zaromb and Roediger (2010)
presented learners with lists consisting of words from different
taxonomic categories (e.g., vegetables, clothing) either for
eight blocks of study trials or for four blocks of study trials
with each trial followed by a practice free-recall test. Replicating basic testing effects, final free recall 2 days later was
greater when items had received practice tests (39%) than
when they had only been studied (17%). Importantly, the practice test condition also outperformed the study condition on
secondary measures primarily tapping organizational processing and idiosyncratic processing.
8.2 How general are the effects of practice testing? Given
the volume of research on testing effects, an exhaustive review
of the literature is beyond the scope of this article. Accordingly, our synthesis below is primarily based on studies from
the past 10 years (which include more than 120 articles),
which we believe represent the current state of the field. Most
of these studies compared conditions involving practice tests
with conditions not involving practice tests or involving only
restudy; however, we also considered more recent work pitting
different practice-testing conditions against one another to
explore when practice testing works best.
8.2a Learning conditions. The majority of research on practice testing has used test formats that involve cued recall of
target information from memory, but some studies have also
shown testing effects with other recall-based practice-test formats, including free recall, short-answer questions, and fillin-the-blank questions. A growing number of studies using
multiple-choice practice tests have also reported testing effects.
Across these formats, most prior research has involved practice tests that tap memory for explicitly presented information.
However, several studies have also shown testing effects for
practice tests that tap comprehension, including short-answer
application and multiple-choice inference-based questions
(e.g., Agarwal & Roediger, 2011; Butler, 2010; C. I. Johnson &
Mayer, 2009). Testing effects have also been shown in a study
in which practice involved predicting (vs. studying) input-output values in an inductive function learning task (Kang,
McDaniel, & Pashler, 2011) and a study in which participants
practiced (vs. restudied) resuscitation procedures (Kromann, 
Improving Student Achievement 31
Jensen, & Ringsted, 2009). Some research has demonstrated
testing effects even when practice tests are open book (Agarwal et al., 2008; Weinstein, McDermott, & Roediger, 2010).
It is important to note that practice tests can benefit learning even when the format of the practice test does not match
the format of the criterion test. For example, research has
shown cross-format effects of multiple-choice practice tests
on subsequent cued recall (Fazio, Agarwal, Marsh, & Roediger, 2010; Marsh, Agarwal, & Roediger, 2009; Roediger &
Marsh, 2005), practice free recall on subsequent multiplechoice and short-answer inference tests (McDaniel, Howard,
& Einstein, 2009), and practice cued recall on subsequent free
recall and recognition (Carpenter, Pashler, & Vul, 2006;
Vaughn & Rawson, 2011).
Although various practice-test formats work, some work
better than others. Glover (1989) presented students with a
short expository text for initial study and then manipulated the
format of the practice test (free recall, fill in the blank, or recognition) and the format of the final test (free recall, fill in the
blank, or recognition). On all three final-test formats, performance was greater following free-recall practice than following fill-in-the-blank practice, which in turn was greater than
performance following recognition practice. Similarly, Carpenter and DeLosh (2006) found that free-recall practice outperformed cued-recall and recognition practice regardless of
whether the final test was in a free-recall, cued-recall, or recognition format, and Hinze and Wiley (2011) found that performance on a multiple-choice final test was better following cued
recall of paragraphs than following fill-in-the-blank practice.
Further work is needed to support strong prescriptive conclusions, but the available evidence suggests that practice tests
that require more generative responses (e.g., recall or short
answer) are more effective than practice tests that require less
generative responses (e.g., fill in the blank or recognition).
In addition to practice-test format, two other conditions of
learning that strongly influence the benefits of practice testing
are dosage and timing. Concerning dosage, the simplest conclusion is that more is better. Some studies supporting this conclusion have manipulated the number of practice tests, and
final-test performance has consistently been better following
multiple practice tests than following a single practice test
(e.g., Karpicke & Roediger, 2007a, 2010; Logan & Balota,
2008; Pavlik & Anderson, 2005). In other studies, experimenters have varied the number of practice tests to manipulate the
level of success achieved during practice. For example, Vaughn
and Rawson (2011) observed significantly greater final-test
performance when students engaged in cued-recall practice
until target items were recalled four to five times versus only
once. Several other studies have shown that final-test performance improves as the number of correct responses during
practice increases (e.g., Karpicke & Roediger, 2007b, 2008;
Pyc & Rawson, 2009, 2012a; Rawson & Dunlosky, 2011),
albeit with diminishing returns as higher criterion levels are
achieved. Whereas these studies have involved manipulations
of dosage within a practice session, other studies that have
manipulated the number of practice sessions have also found
that more is better (Bahrick, 1979; Bahrick, Bahrick, Bahrick,
& Bahrick, 1993; Morris & Fritz, 2002; Rawson & Dunlosky,
2011).
However, the benefit of repeated practice testing in turn
depends on the timing of the practice tests. Several studies
have increased the number of tests presented in immediate
succession within a session and have found minimal or nonexistent effects, in contrast to the sizable benefits observed when
repeated tests are spaced (e.g., Carpenter & DeLosh, 2005;
Cull, 2000; Glover, 1989; Karpicke & Bauernschmidt, 2011).
Concerning the time intervals involved with spacing, longer is
better. Repeated practice testing produces greater benefits
when lags between trials within a session are longer rather
than shorter (e.g., Pashler, Zarow, & Triplett, 2003; Pavlik &
Anderson, 2005; Pyc & Rawson, 2009, 2012b), when trials are
completed in different practice sessions rather than all in the
same session (e.g., Bahrick, 1979; Bahrick & Hall, 2005; Kornell, 2009; Rohrer, 2009; Rohrer & Taylor, 2006), and when
intervals between practice sessions are longer rather than
shorter (Bahrick et al., 1993; Carpenter, Pashler, & Cepeda,
2009, although the optimal lag between sessions may depend
on retention interval—see Cepeda et al., 2009; Cepeda, Vul,
Rohrer, Wixted, & Pashler, 2008). We discuss lag effects further in the Distributed Practice section below.
8.2b Student characteristics. A large majority of studies have
involved college students as participants, but testing effects
have also been demonstrated across participants of widely
varying ages. Studies involving nonundergraduate samples
have differed somewhat in the kind, dosage, or timing of practice testing involved, but some form of testing effect has been
demonstrated with preschoolers and kindergartners (Fritz,
Morris, Nolan, & Singleton, 2007; Kratochwill, Demuth, &
Conzemius, 1977), elementary school students (Atkinson &
Paulson, 1972; Bouwmeester & Verkoeijen, 2011; Fishman,
Keller, & Atkinson, 1968; Gates, 1917; Metcalfe & Kornell,
2007; Metcalfe, Kornell, & Finn, 2009; Myers, 1914; Rea &
Modigliani, 1985; Rohrer, Taylor, & Sholar, 2010; Spitzer,
1939), middle school students (Carpenter et al., 2009; Fritz,
Morris, Nolan, et al., 2007; Glover, 1989; McDaniel, Agarwal,
Huelser, McDermott, & Roediger, 2011; Metcalfe, Kornell, &
Son, 2007; Sones & Stroud, 1940), high school students
(Duchastel, 1981; Duchastel & Nungester, 1982; Marsh et al.,
2009; Nungester & Duchastel, 1982), and more advanced students, such as 3rd- and 4th-year medical-school students (Kromann et al., 2009; Rees, 1986; Schmidmaier et al., 2011). On
the other end of the continuum, testing effects have also been
shown with middle-aged learners and with older adults
(Balota, Duchek, Sergent-Marshall, & Roediger, 2006; Bishara & Jacoby, 2008; Logan & Balota, 2008; Maddox, Balota,
Coane, & Duchek, 2011; Sumowski, Chiaravalloti, & DeLuca,
2010; Tse, Balota, & Roediger, 2010).
In contrast to the relatively broad range of ages covered in
the testing-effect literature, surprisingly minimal research has
examined testing effects as a function of individual differences 
32 Dunlosky et al.
in knowledge or ability. In the only study including groups of
learners with different knowledge levels, Carroll, CampbellRatcliffe, Murnane, and Perfect (2007) presented first-year
undergraduates and advanced psychology majors with two
passages from an abnormal-psychology textbook. Students
completed a short-answer practice test on one of the passages
and then took a final test over both passages either 15 minutes
or 1 day later. Both groups showed similar testing effects at
both time points (with 33% and 38% better accuracy, respectively, on the material that had been practice tested relative to
the material that had not). Although these initial results provide encouraging evidence that testing effects may be robust
across knowledge levels, further work is needed before strong
conclusions can be drawn about the extent to which knowledge level moderates testing effects.
Likewise, minimal research has examined testing effects as
a function of academically relevant ability levels. In a study by
Spitzer (1939), 3,605 sixth graders from 91 different elementary schools read a short text and took an immediate test, to
provide a baseline measure of reading comprehension ability.
In the groups of interest here, all students read an experimental
text, half completed a practice multiple-choice test, and then
all completed a multiple-choice test either 1 or 7 days later.
Spitzer reported final-test performance for the experimental
text separately for the top and bottom thirds of performers on
the baseline measure. As shown in Figure 7, taking the practice
test benefited both groups of students. With that said, the testing
effect appeared to be somewhat larger for higher-ability readers
than for lower-ability readers (with approximately 20%, vs.
12%, improvements in accuracy), although Spitzer did not
report the relevant inferential statistics.
Finally, evidence from studies involving patient populations is at least suggestive with respect to the generality of
testing effects across different levels of learning capacity. For
example, Balota et al. (2006) found that spaced practice tests
improved retention over short time intervals not only for
younger adults and healthy older adults but also for older
adults with Alzheimer’s disease. Similarly, Sumowski et al.
(2010) found that a practice test produced larger testing effects
for memory-impaired, versus memory-intact, subsets of middle-aged individuals with multiple sclerosis (d = 0.95 vs. d =
0.54, respectively, with grouping based on performance on a
baseline measure of memory). In sum, several studies have
suggested that practice testing may benefit individuals with
varying levels of knowledge or ability, but the extent to which
the magnitude of the benefit depends on these factors remains
an open question.
8.2c Materials. Many of the studies that have demonstrated
testing effects have involved relatively simple verbal materials, including word lists and paired associates. However, most
of the sets of materials used have had some educational relevance. A sizable majority of studies using paired-associate
materials have included foreign-language translations (including Chinese, Iñupiaq, Japanese, Lithuanian, Spanish, and
Swahili) or vocabulary words paired with synonyms. Other
studies have extended effects to paired book titles and author
names, names and faces, objects and names, and pictures and
foreign-language translations (e.g., Barcroft, 2007; Carpenter
& Vul, 2011; Morris & Fritz, 2002; Rohrer, 2009).
A considerable number of studies have also shown testing
effects for factual information, including trivia facts and general knowledge questions (e.g., Butler, Karpicke, & Roediger,
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
Day Delay Week Delay Day Delay Week Delay
Top Third on
Baseline Measure
Bottom Third on
Baseline Measure
Final-Test Performance (%)
Practice Test
No Practice Test
Fig. 7. Mean accuracy on a final test administered 1 day or 1 week after a learning session
that either did or did not include a practice test, for the top and bottom thirds of scorers
on a baseline measure of ability, in Spitzer (1939). Error bars represent standard errors.
Improving Student Achievement 33
2008; T. A. Smith & Kimball, 2010) and facts drawn from
classroom units in science, history, and psychology (e.g., Carpenter et al., 2009; McDaniel et al., 2011; McDaniel, Wildman, & Anderson, 2012). Earlier research showed that practice
tests helped children learn multiplication facts and spelling
lists (Atkinson & Paulson, 1972; Fishman et al., 1968; Rea &
Modigliani, 1985), and recent studies have reported enhanced
learning of definitions of vocabulary words (Metcalfe et al.,
2007) and definitions of key term concepts from classroom
material (Rawson & Dunlosky, 2011).
An increasing number of studies have shown benefits for
learning from text materials of various lengths (from 160
words to 2,000 words or more), of various text genres (e.g.,
encyclopedia entries, scientific journal articles, textbook passages), and on a wide range of topics (e.g., Civil War economics, bat echolocation, sea otters, the big bang theory, fossils,
Arctic exploration, toucans). Practice tests have improved
learning from video lectures and from narrated animations on
topics such as adult development, lightning, neuroanatomy,
and art history (Butler & Roediger, 2007; Cranney et al., 2009;
Vojdanoska, Cranney, & Newell, 2010).
Although much of the work on testing effects has used verbal materials, practice testing has also been shown to support
learning of materials that include visual or spatial information,
including learning of features and locations on maps (Carpenter & Pashler, 2007; Rohrer et al., 2010), identifying birds
(Jacoby, Wahlheim, & Coane, 2010), naming objects (Cepeda
et al., 2009; Fritz et al., 2007), associating names with faces
(Helder & Shaughnessy, 2008; Morris & Fritz, 2002), learning
spatial locations of objects (Sommer, Schoell, & Büchel,
2008), learning symbols (Coppens, Verkoeijen, & Rikers,
2011), and identifying depicted parts of a flower (Glover,
1989). Finally, recent work has extended testing effects to
nondeclarative learning, including the learning of resuscitation skills (Kromann et al., 2009) and inductive learning of
input-output functions (Kang, McDaniel, et al., 2011).
8.2d Criterion tasks. Although cued recall is the most commonly used criterion measure, testing effects have also been
shown with other forms of memory tests, including free-recall,
recognition, and fill-in-the-blank tests, as well as short-answer
and multiple-choice questions that tap memory for information explicitly stated in text material.
Regarding transfer, the modal method in testing-effect
research has involved using the same questions tapping the
same target information (e.g., the same cued-recall prompts or
multiple-choice questions) on practice tests and criterion tests.
However, as described in the subsection on learning conditions (8.2a) above, many studies have also shown testing
effects when learning of the same target information is evaluated using different test formats for practice and criterion tests.
Furthermore, an increasing number of studies have shown that
practice testing a subset of information influences memory for
related but untested information (J. C. K. Chan, 2009, 2010; J.
C. K. Chan, McDermott, & Roediger, 2006; Cranney et al.,
2009), although benefits have not always accrued to related
information (see Carroll et al., 2007; Duchastel, 1981).
Although most research has involved memory-based practice tests and criterion measures, several recent studies have
also reported encouraging results concerning the extent to
which practice testing can benefit comprehension. Positive
effects have been shown on criterion tests that require inferences or the application of previously learned information
(Agarwal & Roediger, 2011; Butler, 2010; Foos & Fisher,
1988; C. I. Johnson & Mayer, 2009; Karpicke & Blunt, 2011;
McDaniel et al., 2009), including criterion tests that used different questions or different test formats than those used during practice. For example, Karpicke and Blunt (2011) found
that practicing free recall of text material facilitated performance on a subsequent criterion test involving inferencebased short-answer questions, as well as on a concept-mapping
test. In fact, concept-mapping performance was better following free-recall practice during study than following concept
mapping during study. Similarly, Butler (2010) presented students with expository texts for initial study, which was followed either by repeated restudy or by repeated practice
short-answer tests (with feedback) tapping key facts and concepts from the texts. One week later, performance on new
inference-based short-answer questions tapping the key facts
and concepts was better following practice testing than following restudy (see Fig. 8). The outcomes of a follow-up
experiment are particularly striking, given that the criterion
test involved far transfer, in that questions required the concepts from one domain to be applied in a novel domain (e.g.,
students had to apply information learned about bat wings to
make inferences about the development of new kinds of
aircraft).
Finally, recent studies have also shown testing effects
involving other forms of transfer. Jacoby et al. (2010)
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
Facts Concepts Facts Concepts Concepts
Experiment 1b Experiment 2 Exp. 3
Final-Test Performance (%)
Practice Tests
Restudy
Fig. 8. Accuracy on final tests that consisted of inference-based transfer
questions tapping key facts or concepts, administered 1 week after a learning session that involved either practice tests or restudy, in Butler (2010).
Error bars represent standard errors.
34 Dunlosky et al.
presented learners with pictures of birds and their family
names for initial study, which was followed either by additional study of the picture-name pairs or by practice tests in
which learners were shown each picture and attempted to
retrieve the appropriate family name prior to being shown the
correct answer. The subsequent criterion test involved the
same families of birds but included new pictures of birds from
those families. Learners were more accurate in classifying
new birds following practice testing than following restudy
only. Similarly, Kang, McDaniel, & Pashler (2011) examined
inductive function learning under conditions in which learners
either studied pairs of input-output values or predicted output
for a given input value prior to being shown the correct output.
The prediction group outperformed the study-only group on a
criterion test for both trained pairs and untrained extrapolation
pairs.
In addition to establishing testing effects across an array of
outcome measures, studies have also demonstrated testing
effects across many retention intervals. Indeed, in contrast to
literatures on other learning techniques, contemporary research
on testing effects has actually used short retention intervals
less often than longer retention intervals. Although a fair number of studies have shown testing effects after short delays
(0–20 minutes), the sizable majority of recent research has
involved delays of at least 1 day, and the modal retention interval used is 1 week. The preference for using longer retention
intervals may be due in part to outcomes from several studies
reporting that testing effects are larger when final tests are
administered after longer delays (J. C. K. Chan, 2009; Coppens et al., 2011; C. I. Johnson & Mayer, 2009; Kornell, Bjork,
& Garcia, 2011; Roediger & Karpicke, 2006b; Runquist, 1983;
Schmidmaier et al., 2011; Toppino & Cohen, 2009; Wenger,
Thompson, & Bartling, 1980; Wheeler, Ewers, & Buonanno,
2003). It is impressive that testing effects have been observed
after even longer intervals, including intervals of 2 to 4 weeks
(e.g., Bahrick & Hall, 2005; Butler & Roediger, 2007; Carpenter, Pashler, Wixted, & Vul, 2008; Kromann et al., 2009;
Rohrer, 2009), 2 to 4 months (e.g., McDaniel, Anderson, Derbish, & Morrisette, 2007; Morris & Fritz, 2002; Rawson &
Dunlosky, 2011), 5 to 8 months (McDaniel et al., 2011; Rees,
1986), 9-11 months (Carpenter et al., 2009), and even 1 to 5
years (Bahrick et al., 1993). These findings are great news for
students and educators, given that a key educational goal is
durable knowledge and not just temporary improvements in
learning.
8.3 Effects in representative educational contexts. As
described above, much of the research on testing effects has
involved educationally relevant materials, tasks, and retention
intervals. Additionally, several studies have reported testing
effects using authentic classroom materials (i.e., material
taken from classes in which student participants were enrolled;
Carpenter et al., 2009; Cranney et al., 2009; Kromann et al.,
2009; McDaniel et al., 2007; Rawson & Dunlosky, 2011;
Rees, 1986; Vojdanoska et al., 2010). Whereas the criterion
measures in these studies involved experimenter-devised tests
or no-stakes pop quizzes, research has also shown effects of
practice testing on actual summative course assessments
(Balch, 1998; Daniel & Broida, 2004; Lyle & Crawford, 2011;
McDaniel et al., 2011; McDaniel et al., 2012).
For example, a study by McDaniel et al. (2012) involved
undergraduates enrolled in an online psychology course on the
brain and behavior. Each week, students could earn course
points by completing an online practice activity up to four
times. In the online activity, some information was presented
for practice testing with feedback, some information was presented for restudy, and some information was not presented.
Subsequent unit exams included questions that had been presented during the practice tests and also new, related questions
focusing on different aspects of the practiced concepts. As
shown in Figure 9, grades on unit exams were higher for information that had been practice tested than for restudied information or unpracticed information, for both repeated questions
and for new related questions.
8.4 Issues for implementation. Practice testing appears to be
relatively reasonable with respect to time demands. Most
research has shown effects of practice testing when the amount
of time allotted for practice testing is modest and is equated
with the time allotted for restudying. Another merit of practice
testing is that it can be implemented with minimal training.
Students can engage in recall-based self-testing in a relatively
straightforward fashion. For example, students can self-test via
cued recall by creating flashcards (free and low-cost flashcard
software is also readily available) or by using the Cornell
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
Repeated Questions New Questions
Course Exam Grade (%)
Practice Tests
Restudy
No Practice
Fig. 9. Grades on course exams covering items that were presented for
practice testing, presented for restudy, or not presented during online
learning activities that students completed for course points. The course
exam included some questions that had been presented during practice
tests as well as new questions tapping the same information. For simplicity,
outcomes reported here are collapsed across two experiments reported
by McDaniel, Wildman, and Anderson (2012).
Improving Student Achievement 35
note-taking system (which involves leaving a blank column
when taking notes in class and entering key terms or questions
in it shortly after taking notes to use for self-testing when
reviewing notes at a later time; for more details, see Pauk &
Ross, 2010). More structured forms of practice testing (e.g.,
multiple-choice, short-answer, and fill-in-the-blank tests) are
often readily available to students via practice problems or
questions included at the end of textbook chapters or in the
electronic supplemental materials that accompany many textbooks. With that said, students would likely benefit from some
basic instruction on how to most effectively use practice tests,
given that the benefits of testing depend on the kind of test,
dosage, and timing. As described above, practice testing is particularly advantageous when it involves retrieval and is continued until items are answered correctly more than once within
and across practice sessions, and with longer as opposed to
shorter intervals between trials or sessions.
Concerning the effectiveness of practice testing relative to
other learning techniques, a few studies have shown benefits
of practice testing over concept mapping, note-taking, and
imagery use (Fritz et al., 2007; Karpicke & Blunt, 2011;
McDaniel et al., 2009; Neuschatz, Preston, Toglia, &
Neuschatz, 2005), but the most frequent comparisons have
involved pitting practice testing against unguided restudy. The
modal outcome is that practice testing outperforms restudying,
although this effect depends somewhat on the extent to which
practice tests are accompanied by feedback involving presentation of the correct answer. Although many studies have
shown that testing alone outperforms restudy, some studies
have failed to find this advantage (in most of these cases, accuracy on the practice test has been relatively low). In contrast,
the advantage of practice testing with feedback over restudy is
extremely robust. Practice testing with feedback also consistently outperforms practice testing alone.
Another reason to recommend the implementation of feedback with practice testing is that it protects against perseveration errors when students respond incorrectly on a practice
test. For example, Butler and Roediger (2008) found that a
multiple-choice practice test increased intrusions of false
alternatives on a final cued-recall test when no feedback was
provided, whereas no such increase was observed when feedback was given. Fortunately, the corrective effect of feedback
does not require that it be presented immediately after the
practice test. Metcalfe et al. (2009) found that final-test performance for initially incorrect responses was actually better
when feedback had been delayed than when it had been immediate. Also encouraging is evidence suggesting that feedback
is particularly effective for correcting high-confidence errors
(e.g., Butterfield & Metcalfe, 2001). Finally, we note that the
effects of practice-test errors on subsequent performance tend
to be relatively small, often do not obtain, and are heavily outweighed by the positive benefits of testing (e.g., Fazio et al.,
2010; Kang, Pashler, et al., 2011; Roediger & Marsh, 2005).
Thus, potential concerns about errors do not constitute a
serious issue for implementation, particularly when feedback
is provided.
Finally, although we have focused on students’ use of practice testing, in keeping with the purpose of this monograph,
we briefly note that instructors can also support student learning by increasing the use of low-stakes or no-stakes practice
testing in the classroom. Several studies have also reported
positive outcomes from administering summative assessments that are shorter and more frequent rather than longer
and less frequent (e.g., one exam per week rather than only
two or three exams per semester), not only for learning outcomes but also on students’ ratings of factors such as course
satisfaction and preference for more frequent testing (e.g.,
Keys, 1934; Kika, McLaughlin, & Dixon, 1992; Leeming,
2002; for a review, see Bangert-Drowns, Kulik, & Kulik,
1991).
8.5 Practice testing: Overall assessment. On the basis of the
evidence described above, we rate practice testing as having
high utility. Testing effects have been demonstrated across an
impressive range of practice-test formats, kinds of material,
learner ages, outcome measures, and retention intervals. Thus,
practice testing has broad applicability. Practice testing is not
particularly time intensive relative to other techniques, and it
can be implemented with minimal training. Finally, several
studies have provided evidence for the efficacy of practice
testing in representative educational contexts. Regarding recommendations for future research, one gap identified in the
literature concerns the extent to which the benefits of practice
testing depend on learners’ characteristics, such as prior
knowledge or ability. Exploring individual differences in testing effects would align well with the aim to identify the
broader generalizability of the benefits of practice testing.
Moreover, research aimed at more thoroughly identify the
causes of practice-test effects may provide further insights into
maximizing these effects.
9 Distributed practice
To-be-learned material is often encountered on more than one
occasion, such as when students review their notes and then
later use flashcards to restudy the materials, or when a topic is
covered in class and then later studied in a textbook. Even so,
students mass much of their study prior to tests and believe
that this popular cramming strategy is effective. Although
cramming is better than not studying at all in the short term,
given the same amount of time for study, would students be
better off spreading out their study of content? The answer to
this question is a resounding “yes.” The term distributedpractice effect refers to the finding that distributing learning
over time (either within a single study session or across sessions) typically benefits long-term retention more than does
massing learning opportunities back-to-back or in relatively
close succession.
36 Dunlosky et al.
Given the volume of research on distributed practice, an
exhaustive review of the literature is beyond the scope of this
article. Fortunately, this area of research benefits from extensive review articles (e.g., Benjamin & Tullis, 2010; Cepeda,
Pashler, Vul, Wixted, & Rohrer, 2006; Delaney, Verkoeijen, &
Spirgel, 2010; Dempster & Farris, 1990; Donovan & Radosevich, 1999; Janiszewski, Noel, & Sawyer, 2003), which provided foundations for the current review. In keeping with
recent reviews (Cepeda et al., 2006; Delaney et al., 2010), we
use the term distributed practice to encompass both spacing
effects (i.e., the advantage of spaced over massed practice) and
lag effects (i.e., the advantage of spacing with longer lags over
spacing with shorter lags), and we draw on both literatures for
our summary.
9.1 General description of distributed practice and why it
should work. To illustrate the issues involved, we begin with
a description of a classic experiment on distributed practice, in
which students learned translations of Spanish words to criterion in an original session (Bahrick, 1979). Students then participated in six additional sessions in which they had the
chance to retrieve and relearn the translations (feedback was
provided). Figure 10 presents results from this study. In the
zero-spacing condition (represented by the circles in Fig. 10),
the learning sessions were back-to-back, and learning was
rapid across the six massed sessions. In the 1-day condition
(represented by the squares in Fig. 10), learning sessions were
spaced 1 day apart, resulting in slightly more forgetting across
sessions (i.e., lower performance on the initial test in each session) than in the zero-spacing condition, but students in the
1-day condition still obtained almost perfect accuracy by the
sixth session. In contrast, when learning sessions were separated by 30 days, forgetting was much greater across sessions,
and initial test performance did not reach the level observed in
the other two conditions, even after six sessions (see triangles
in Fig. 10). The key point for our present purposes is that the
pattern reversed on the final test 30 days later, such that the
best retention of the translations was observed in the condition
in which relearning sessions had been separated by 30 days.
That is, the condition with the most intersession forgetting
yielded the greatest long-term retention. Spaced practice
(1 day or 30 days) was superior to massed practice (0 days),
and the benefit was greater following a longer lag (30 days)
than a shorter lag (1 day).
Many theories of distributed-practice effects have been
proposed and tested. Consider some of the accounts currently
under debate (for in-depth reviews, see Benjamin & Tullis,
2010; Cepeda et al., 2006). One theory invokes the idea of
deficient processing, arguing that the processing of material
during a second learning opportunity suffers when it is close in
time to the original learning episode. Basically, students do not
have to work very hard to reread notes or retrieve something
from memory when they have just completed this same activity, and furthermore, they may be misled by the ease of this
second task and think they know the material better than they
really do (e.g., Bahrick & Hall, 2005). Another theory involves
reminding; namely, the second presentation of to-be-learned
material serves to remind the learner of the first learning
opportunity, leading it to be retrieved, a process well known to
enhance memory (see the Practice Testing section above).
Some researchers also draw on consolidation in their explanations, positing that the second learning episode benefits from
any consolidation of the first trace that has already happened.
Given the relatively large magnitude of distributed-practice
effects, it is plausible that multiple mechanisms may contribute to them; hence, particular theories often invoke different
combinations of mechanisms to explain the effects.
9.2 How general are the effects of distributed practice?
The distributed-practice effect is robust. Cepeda et al. (2006)
reviewed 254 studies involving more than 14,000 participants
altogether; overall, students recalled more after spaced study
(47%) than after massed study (37%). In both Donovan and
Radosevich’s (1999) and Janiszewski et al.’s (2003) metaanalyses, distributed practice was associated with moderate
effect sizes for recall of verbal stimuli. As we describe below,
the distributed-practice effect generalizes across many of the
categories of variables listed in Table 2.
9.2a Learning conditions. Distributed practice refers to a particular schedule of learning episodes, as opposed to a particular
kind of learning episode. That is, the distributed-practice effect
refers to better learning when learning episodes are spread out
in time than when they occur in close succession, but those
learning episodes could involve restudying material, retrieving
information from memory, or practicing skills. Because our
emphasis is on educational applications, we will not
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1
2345 6
Proportion Correct
Session
0 Days Between Sessions
1 Day Between Sessions
30 Days Between Sessions
Final Test
After 30 Days
Fig. 10. Proportion of items answered correctly on an initial test administered in each of six practice sessions (prior to actual practice) and on the
final test 30 days after the final practice session as a function of lag between
sessions (0 days, 1 day, or 30 days) in Bahrick (1979).
Improving Student Achievement 37
draw heavily on the skill literature, given that tasks such as ball
tossing, gymnastics, and music memorization are less relevant
to our purposes. Because much theory on the distributed-practice effect is derived from research on the spacing of study episodes, we focus on that research, but we also discuss relevant
studies on distributed retrieval practice. In general, distributed
practice testing is better than distributed study (e.g., Carpenter
et al., 2009), as would be expected from the large literature on
the benefits of practice testing.
One of the most important questions about distributed practice involves how to space the learning episodes—that is, how
should the multiple encoding opportunities be arranged?
Cepeda et al. (2006) noted that most studies have used relatively short intervals (less than 1 day), whereas we would
expect the typical interval between educational learning
opportunities (e.g., lecture and studying) to be longer. Recall
that the classic investigation by Bahrick (1979) showed a
larger distributed-practice effect with 30-day lags between
sessions than with 1-day lags (Fig. 10); Cepeda et al. (2006)
noted that “every study examined here with a retention interval longer than 1 month demonstrated a benefit from distribution of learning across weeks or months” (p. 370; “retention
interval” here refers to the time between the last study opportunity and the final test).
However, the answer is not as simple as “longer lags are
better”—the answer depends on how long the learner wants to
retain information. Impressive data come from Cepeda, Vul,
Rohrer, Wixted, and Pashler (2008), who examined people’s
learning of trivia facts in an internet study that had 26 different
conditions, which combined different between-session intervals (from no lag to a lag of 105 days) with different retention
intervals (up to 350 days). In brief, criterion performance was
best when the lag between sessions was approximately 10–
20% of the desired retention interval. For example, to remember something for 1 week, learning episodes should be spaced
12 to 24 hours apart; to remember something for 5 years, the
learning episodes should be spaced 6 to 12 months apart. Of
course, when students are preparing for examinations, the
degree to which they can space their study sessions may be
limited, but the longest intervals (e.g., intervals of 1 month or
more) may be ideal for studying core content that needs to be
retained for cumulative examinations or achievement tests that
assess the knowledge students have gained across several
years of education.
Finally, the distributed-practice effect may depend on the
type of processing evoked across learning episodes. In the
meta-analysis by Janiszewski et al. (2003), intentional processing was associated with a larger effect size (M = .35) than
was incidental processing (M = .24). Several things should be
noted. First, the distributed-practice effect is sometimes
observed with incidental processing (e.g., R. L. Greene, 1989;
Toppino, Fearnow-Kenney, Kiepert, & Teremula, 2009); it is
not eliminated across the board, but the average effect size is
slightly (albeit significantly) smaller. Second, the type of processing learners engage in may covary with the intentionality
of their learning, with students being more likely to extract
meaning from materials when they are deliberately trying to
learn them. In at least two studies, deeper processing yielded a
distributed-practice effect whereas more shallow processing
did not (e.g., Challis, 1993; Delaney & Knowles, 2005).
Whereas understanding how distributed-practice effects
change with strategy has important theoretical implications,
this issue is less important when considering applications to
education, because when students are studying, they presumably are intentionally trying to learn.
9.2b Student characteristics. The majority of distributedpractice experiments have tested undergraduates, but effects
have also been demonstrated in other populations. In at least
some situations, even clinical populations can benefit from
distributed practice, including individuals with multiple sclerosis (Goverover, Hillary, Chiaravalloti, Arango-Lasprilla, &
DeLuca, 2009), traumatic brain injuries (Goverover, ArangoLasprilla, Hillary, Chiaravalloti, & DeLuca, 2009), and amnesia (Cermak, Verfaellie, Lanzoni, Mather, & Chase, 1996). In
general, children of all ages benefit from distributed study. For
example, when learning pictures, children as young as preschoolers recognize and recall more items studied after longer
lags than after shorter lags (Toppino, 1991; Toppino, Kasserman, & Mracek, 1991). Similarly, 3-year-olds are better able
to classify new exemplars of a category if the category was
originally learned through spaced rather than massed study
(Vlach, Sandhofer, & Kornell, 2008). Even 2-year-olds show
benefits of distributed practice, such that it increases their later
ability to produce studied words (Childers & Tomasello,
2002). These benefits of spacing for language learning also
occur for children with specific language impairment (Riches,
Tomasello, & Conti-Ramsden, 2005).
At the other end of the life span, older adults learning paired
associates benefit from distributed practice as much as young
adults do (e.g., Balota, Duchek, & Paullin, 1989). Similar conclusions are reached when spacing involves practice tests
rather than study opportunities (e.g., Balota et al., 2006; Logan
& Balota, 2008) and when older adults are learning to classify
exemplars of a category (as opposed to paired associates; Kornell, Castel, Eich, & Bjork, 2010). In summary, learners of
different ages benefit from distributed practice, but an open
issue is the degree to which the distributed-practice effect may
be moderated by other individual characteristics, such as prior
knowledge and motivation.
9.2c Materials. Distributed-practice effects have been
observed with many types of to-be-learned materials, including
definitions (e.g., Dempster, 1987), face-name pairs (e.g., Carpenter & DeLosh, 2005), translations of foreign vocabulary
words (e.g., Bahrick & Hall, 2005), trivia facts (e.g., Cepeda
et al., 2008), texts (e.g., Rawson & Kintsch, 2005), lectures
(e.g., Glover & Corkill, 1987), and pictures (e.g., Hintzman &
Rogers, 1973). Distributed study has also yielded improved performance in a range of domains, including biology (Reynolds &
Glaser, 1964) and advertising (e.g., Appleton-Knapp, Bjork, &
Wickens, 2005). If we include practice testing and practice of 
38 Dunlosky et al.
skills, then the list of domains in which benefits of distributed
practice have been successfully demonstrated can be expanded
to include mathematics (e.g., Rickard, Lau, & Pashler, 2008;
Rohrer, 2009), history (Carpenter et al., 2009), music (e.g., Simmons, 2011), and surgery (e.g., Moulton et al., 2006), among
others.
Not all tasks yield comparably large distributed-practice
effects. For instance, distributed-practice effects are large for
free recall but are smaller (or even nonexistent) for tasks that
are very complex, such as airplane control (Donovan & Radosevich, 1999). It is not clear how to map these kinds of complex
tasks, which tend to have a large motor component, onto the
types of complex tasks seen in education. The U.S. Institute of
Education Sciences guide on organizing study to improve
learning explicitly notes that “one limitation of the literature is
that few studies have examined acquisition of complex bodies
of structured information” (Pashler et al., 2007, p. 6). The data
that exist (which are reviewed below) have come from classroom studies and are promising.
9.2d Criterion tasks. We alluded earlier to the fact that distributed-practice effects are robust over long retention intervals, with Cepeda and colleagues (2008) arguing that the ideal
lag between practice sessions would be approximately 10–
20% of the desired retention interval. They examined learning
up to 350 days after study; other studies have shown benefits
of distributed testing after intervals lasting for months (e.g.,
Cepeda et al., 2009) and even years (e.g., Bahrick et al., 1993;
Bahrick & Phelps, 1987). In fact, the distributed-practice
effect is often stronger on delayed tests than immediate ones,
with massed practice (cramming) actually benefitting performance on immediate tests (e.g., Rawson & Kintsch, 2005).
Much research has established the durability of distributedpractice effects over time, but much less attention has been
devoted to other kinds of criterion tasks used in educational
contexts. The Cepeda et al. (2009) meta-analysis, for example,
focused on studies in which the dependent measure was verbal
free recall. The distributed-practice effect has been generalized to dependent measures beyond free recall, including multiple-choice questions, cued-recall and short-answer questions
(e.g., Reynolds & Glaser, 1964), frequency judgments (e.g.,
Hintzman & Rogers, 1973), and, sometimes, implicit memory
(e.g., R. L. Greene, 1990; Jacoby & Dallas, 1981). More generally, although studies using these basic measures of memory
can inform the field by advancing theory, the effects of distributed practice on these measures will not necessarily generalize
to all other educationally relevant measures. Given that students are often expected to go beyond the basic retention of
materials, this gap is perhaps the largest and most important to
fill for the literature on distributed practice. With that said,
some relevant data from classroom studies are available; we
turn to these in the next section.
9.3 Effects in representative educational contexts. Most
of the classroom studies that have demonstrated distributedpractice effects have involved spacing of more than just study
opportunities. It is not surprising that real classroom exercises
would use a variety of techniques, given that the goal of educators is to maximize learning rather than to isolate the contributions of individual techniques. Consider a study by Sobel,
Cepeda, and Kapler (2011) in which fifth graders learned
vocabulary words. Each learning session had multiple steps: A
teacher read and defined words; the students wrote down the
definitions; the teacher repeated the definitions and used them
in sentences, and students reread the definitions; finally, the
students wrote down the definitions again and created sentences using the words. Several different kinds of study
(including reading from booklets and overheads, as well as
teacher instruction) and practice tests (e.g., generating definitions and sentences) were spaced in this research. The criterion test was administered 5 weeks after the second learning
session, and students successfully defined a greater proportion
of GRE vocabulary words (e.g., accolade) learned in sessions
spaced a week apart than vocabulary words learned in sessions
spaced a minute apart (Sobel et al., 2011). A mix of teacher
instruction and student practice was also involved in a demonstration of the benefits of distributed practice for learning phonics in first graders (Seabrook, Brown, & Solity, 2005).
Another study examined learning of statistics across two
sections of the same course, one of which was taught over a
6-month period and the other of which covered the same material in an 8-week period (Budé, Imbos, van de Wiel, & Berger,
2011). The authors took advantage of a curriculum change at
their university that allowed them to compare learning in a
class taught before the university reduced the length of the
course with learning in a class taught after the change. The curriculum change meant that lectures, problem-based group
meetings, and lab sessions (as well as student-driven study,
assignments, etc.) were implemented within a much shorter
time period; in other words, a variety of study and retrieval
activities were more spaced out in time in one class than in the
other. Students whose course lasted 6 months outperformed
students in the 8-week course both on an open-ended test tapping conceptual understanding (see Fig. 11) and on the final
exam (Fig. 12). Critically, the two groups performed similarly
on a control exam from another course (Fig. 12), suggesting
that the effects of distributed practice were not due to ability
differences across classes.
Finally, a number of classroom studies have examined the
benefits of distributed practice tests. Distributed practice testing helps students in actual classrooms learn history facts
(Carpenter et al., 2009), foreign language vocabulary (K. C.
Bloom & Shuell, 1981), and spelling (Fishman et al., 1968).
9.4 Issues for implementation. Several obstacles may arise
when implementing distributed practice in the classroom.
Dempster and Farris (1990) made the interesting point that
many textbooks do not encourage distributed learning, in that
they lump related material together and do not review previously covered material in subsequent units. At least one formal
content analysis of actual textbooks (specifically, elementaryschool mathematics textbooks; Stigler, Fuson, Ham, & Kim,
1986) supported this claim, showing that American textbooks 
Improving Student Achievement 39
grouped to-be-worked problems together (presumably at the
end of chapters) as opposed to distributing them throughout
the pages. These textbooks also contained less variability in
sets of problems than did comparable textbooks from the former Soviet Union. Thus, one issue students face is that their
study materials may not be set up in a way that encourages
distributed practice.
A second issue involves how students naturally study.
Michael (1991) used the term procrastination scallop to
describe the typical study pattern—namely, that time spent
studying increases as an exam approaches. Mawhinney, Bostow, Laws, Blumenfield, and Hopkins (1971) documented this
pattern using volunteers who agreed to study in an observation
room that allowed their time spent studying to be recorded.
With daily testing, students studied for a consistent amount of
time across sessions. But when testing occurred only once
every 3 weeks, time spent studying increased across the interval, peaking right before the exam (Mawhinney et al., 1971).
In other words, less frequent testing led to massed study
immediately before the test, whereas daily testing effectively
led to study that was distributed over time. The implication is
that students will not necessarily engage in distributed study
unless the situation forces them to do so; it is unclear whether
this is because of practical constraints or because students do
not understand the memorial benefits of distributed practice.
With regard to the issue of whether students understand the
benefits of distributed practice, the data are not entirely definitive. Several laboratory studies have investigated students’
choices about whether to mass or space repeated studying of
paired associates (e.g., GRE vocabulary words paired with
their definitions). In such studies, students typically choose
between restudying an item almost immediately after learning
(massing) or restudying the item later in the same session
(spacing). Although students do choose to mass their study
under some conditions (e.g., Benjamin & Bird, 2006; Son,
2004), they typically choose to space their study of items (Pyc
& Dunlosky, 2010; Toppino, Cohen, Davis, & Moors, 2009).
This bias toward spacing does not necessarily mean that students understand the benefits of distributed practice per se
(e.g., they may put off restudying a pair because they do not
want to see it again immediately), and one study has shown
that students rate their overall level of learning as higher after
massed study than after spaced study, even when the students
had experienced the benefits of spacing (e.g., Kornell & Bjork,
2008). Other recent studies have provided evidence that students are unaware of the benefits of practicing with longer, as
opposed to shorter, lags (Pyc & Rawson, 2012b; Wissman
et al., 2012).
In sum, because of practical constraints and students’
potential lack of awareness of the benefits of this technique,
students may need some training and some convincing that
distributed practice is a good way to learn and retain information. Simply experiencing the distributed-practice effect may
not always be sufficient, but a demonstration paired with
instruction about the effect may be more convincing to students (e.g., Balch, 2006).
9.5 Distributed practice: Overall assessment. On the basis
of the available evidence, we rate distributed practice as having high utility: It works across students of different ages, with
a wide variety of materials, on the majority of standard laboratory measures, and over long delays. It is easy to implement
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
During Course Immediately After Course
Points Earned on Conceptual Test
8-Week Course
6-Month Course
Fig. 11. Points earned on an open-ended test tapping conceptual understanding of content from two sections of a course, one taught over an
8-week period and the other taught over a 6-month period, in Budé, Imbos, van de Wiel, and Berger (2011). Error bars represent standard errors.
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
Critical Course Control Course
Final Exam Score
8-Week Course
6-Month Course
Fig. 12. Final-exam scores in a critical course and a control course as a
function of the length of the course (8 weeks or 6 months); data drawn
from Budé, Imbos, van de Wiel, and Berger (2011). Standard errors are
not available.
40 Dunlosky et al.
(although it may require some training) and has been used successfully in a number of classroom studies. Although less
research has examined distributed-practice effects using complex materials, the existing classroom studies have suggested
that distributed practice should work for complex materials as
well. Future research should examine this issue, as well as
possible individual differences beyond age and criterion tasks
that require higher-level cognition. Finally, future work should
isolate the contributions of distributed study from those of distributed retrieval in educational contexts.
10 Interleaved practice
In virtually every kind of class at every grade level, students
are expected to learn content from many different subtopics or
problems of many different kinds. For example, students in a
neuroanatomy course would learn about several different divisions of the nervous system, and students in a geometry course
would learn various formulas for computing properties of
objects such as surface area and volume. Given that the goal is
to learn all of the material, how should a student schedule his
or her studying of the different materials? An intuitive
approach, and one we suspect is adopted by most students,
involves blocking study or practice, such that all content from
one subtopic is studied or all problems of one type are practiced before the student moves on to the next set of material. In
contrast, recent research has begun to explore interleaved
practice, in which students alternate their practice of different
kinds of items or problems. Our focus here is on whether interleaved practice benefits students’ learning of educationally
relevant material.
Before we present evidence of the efficacy of this technique, we should point out that, in contrast to the other techniques we have reviewed in this monograph, many fewer
studies have investigated the benefits of interleaved practice
on measures relevant to student achievement. Nonetheless, we
elected to include this technique in our review because (a)
plenty of evidence indicates that interleaving can improve
motor learning under some conditions (for reviews, see Brady,
1998; R. A. Schmidt & Bjork, 1992; Wulf & Shea, 2002) and
(b) the growing literature on interleaving and performance on
cognitive tasks is demonstrating the same kind of promise.
10.1 General description of interleaved practice and why
it should work. Interleaved practice, as opposed to blocked
practice, is easily understood by considering a method used by
Rohrer and Taylor (2007), which involved teaching college
students to compute the volumes of different geometric solids.
Students had two practice sessions, which were separated by 1
week. During each practice session, students were given tutorials on how to find the volume for four different kinds of geometric solids and completed 16 practice problems (4 for each
solid). After the completion of each practice problem, the correct solution was shown for 10 seconds. Students in a blockedpractice condition first read a tutorial on finding the volume of
a given solid, which was immediately followed by the four
practice problems for that kind of solid. Practice solving volumes for a given solid was then followed by the tutorial and
practice problems for the next kind of solid, and so on. Students in an interleaved-practice group first read all four tutorials and then completed all the practice problems, with the
constraint that every set of four consecutive problems included
one problem for each of the four kinds of solids. One week
after the second practice session, all students took a criterion
test in which they solved two novel problems for each of the
four kinds of solids. Students’ percentages of correct responses
during the practice sessions and during the criterion test are
presented in Figure 13, which illustrates a typical interleaving
effect: During practice, performance was better with blocked
practice than interleaved practice, but this advantage dramatically reversed on the criterion test, such that interleaved practice boosted accuracy by 43%.
One explanation for this impressive effect is that interleaving gave students practice at identifying which solution
method (i.e., which of several different formulas) should be
used for a given solid (see also, Mayfield & Chase, 2002). Put
differently, interleaved practice helps students to discriminate
between the different kinds of problems so that they will be
more likely to use the correct solution method for each one.
Compelling evidence for this possibility was provided by Taylor and Rohrer (2010). Fourth graders learned to solve mathematical problems involving prisms. For a prism with a given
number of base sides (b), students learned to solve for the
number of faces (b + 2), edges (b × 3), corners (b × 2), or
angles (b × 6). Students first practiced partial problems: A
term for a single component of a prism was presented (e.g.,
corners), the student had to produce the correct formula (i.e.,
for corners, the correct response would be “b × 2”), and then
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
Practice Performance Test Performance
Accuracy (%)
Blocked
Interleaved
Fig. 13. Percentage of correct responses on sets of problems completed
in practice sessions and on a delayed criterion test in Rohrer and Taylor
(2007). Error bars represent standard errors.
Improving Student Achievement 41
feedback (the correct answer) was provided. After practicing
partial problems, students practiced full problems, in which
they were shown a prism with a number of base sides (e.g., 14
sides) and a term for a single component (e.g., edges). Students had to produce the correct formula (b × 3) and solve the
problem by substituting the appropriate value of b (14 × 3).
Most important, students in a blocked-practice group completed all partial- and full-practice problems for one prism feature (e.g., angles) before moving onto the next. For students in
an interleaved-practice group, each block of four practice
problems included one problem for each of the four prism features. One day after practice, a criterion test was administered
in which students were asked to solve full problems that had
not appeared during practice.
Accuracy during practice was greater for students who had
received blocked practice than for students who had received
interleaved practice, both for partial problems (99% vs. 68%,
respectively) and for full problems (98% vs. 79%). By contrast, accuracy 1 day later was substantially higher for students
who had received interleaved practice (77%) than for students
who had received blocked practice (38%). As with Rohrer and
Taylor (2006), a plausible explanation for this pattern is that
interleaved practice helped students to discriminate between
various kinds of problems and to learn the appropriate formula
to apply for each one. This explanation was supported by a
detailed analysis of errors the fourth graders made when solving the full problems during the criterion task. Fabrication
errors involved cases in which students used a formula that
was not originally trained (e.g., b × 8), whereas discrimination
errors involved cases in which students used one of the four
formulas that had been practiced but was not appropriate for a
given problem. As shown in Figure 14, the two groups did not
differ in fabrication errors, but discrimination errors were
more common after blocked practice than after interleaved
practiced. Students who received interleaved practice apparently were better at discriminating among the kinds of problems and consistently applied the correct formula to each one.
How does interleaving produce these benefits? One explanation is that interleaved practice promotes organizational
processing and item-specific processing because it allows students to more readily compare different kinds of problems. For
instance, in Rohrer and Taylor (2007), it is possible that when
students were solving for the volume of one kind of solid (e.g.,
a wedge) during interleaved practice, the solution method used
for the immediately prior problem involving a different kind
of solid (e.g., a spheroid) was still in working memory and
hence encouraged a comparison of the two problems and their
different formulas. Another possible explanation is based on
the distributed retrieval from long-term memory that is
afforded by interleaved practice. In particular, for blocked
practice, the information relevant to completing a task
(whether it be a solution to a problem or memory for a set of
related items) should reside in working memory; hence, participants should not have to retrieve the solution. So, if a student completes a block of problems solving for volumes of
wedges, the solution to each new problem will be readily
available from working memory. By contrast, for interleaved
practice, when the next type of problem is presented, the solution method for it must be retrieved from long-term memory.
So, if a student has just solved for the volume of a wedge and
then must solve for the volume of a spheroid, he or she must
retrieve the formula for spheroids from memory. Such delayed
practice testing would boost memory for the retrieved information (for details, see the Practice Testing section above).
This retrieval-practice hypothesis and the discriminative-contrast hypothesis are not mutually exclusive, and other mechanisms may also contribute to the benefits of interleaved
practice.
10.2 How general are the effects of interleaved practice?
10.2a Learning conditions. Interleaved practice itself represents a learning condition, and it naturally covaries with distributed practice. For instance, if the practice trials for tasks of
a given kind are blocked, the practice for the task is massed.
By contrast, by interleaving practice across tasks of different
kinds, any two instances of a task from a given set (e.g., solving for the volume of a given type of geometrical solid) would
be separated by practice of instances from other tasks. Thus, at
least some of the benefits of interleaved practice may reflect
the benefits of distributed practice. However, some researchers have investigated the benefits of interleaved practice with
spacing held constant (e.g., Kang & Pashler, 2012; Mitchell,
Nash, & Hall, 2008), and the results suggested that spacing is
not responsible for interleaving effects. For instance, Kang
and Pashler (2012) had college students study paintings by
various artists with the goal of developing a concept of each
artists’ style, so that the students could later correctly identify
the artists who had produced paintings that had not been
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
Fabrication Discrimination
Percent Incorrect
Blocked
Interleaved
Fig. 14. Types of errors made by fourth graders while solving mathematical problems on a delayed criterion test in Taylor and Rohrer (2010). Error
bars represent standard errors.
42 Dunlosky et al.
presented during practice. During practice, the presentation of
paintings was either blocked by artist (e.g., all paintings by Jan
Blencowe were presented first, followed by all paintings by
Richard Lindenberg, and so on) or interleaved. Most important, a third group received blocked practice, but instead of
viewing the paintings one right after another in a massed fashion, a cartoon drawing was presented in between the presentation of each painting (the cartoons were presented so that the
temporal spacing in this spaced-block-practice group was the
same as that for the interleaved group). Criterion performance
was best after interleaved practice and was significantly better
than after either standard or temporally spaced blocked practice. No differences occurred in performance between the two
blocked-practice groups, which indicates that spacing alone
will not consistently benefit concept formation.
This outcome is more consistent with the discriminativecontrast hypothesis than the retrieval-practice hypothesis. In
particular, on each trial, the group receiving temporally spaced
blocked practice presumably needed to retrieve (from longterm memory) what they had already learned about a painters’
style, yet doing so did not boost their performance. That is,
interleaved practice encouraged students to identify the critical differences among the various artists’ styles, which in turn
helped students discriminate among the artists’ paintings on
the criterion test. According to this hypothesis, interleaved
practice may further enhance students’ ability to develop accurate concepts (e.g., a concept of an artist’s style) when exemplars of different concepts are presented simultaneously. For
instance, instead of paintings being presented separately but in
an interleaved fashion, a set of paintings could be presented at
the same time. In this case, a student could more readily scan
the paintings of the various artists to identify differences
among them. Kang and Pashler (2012) found that simultaneous presentation of paintings from different artists yielded
about the same level of criterion performance (68%) as standard interleaving did (65%), and that both types of interleaved
practice were superior to blocked practice (58%; for a similar
finding involving students learning to classify birds, see Wahlheim, Dunlosky, & Jacoby, 2011).
Finally, the amount of instruction and practice that students
initially receive with each task may influence the degree to
which interleaving all tasks enhances performance. In fact, in
educational contexts, introducing a new concept or problem
type (e.g., how to find the volume of a spheroid) would naturally begin with initial instruction and blocked practice with
that concept or problem type, and most of the studies reported
in this section involved an introduction to all tasks before
interleaving began. The question is how much initial practice
is enough, and whether students with low skill levels (or students learning to solve more difficult tasks) will require more
practice before interleaving begins. Given that skill level and
task difficulty have been shown to moderate the benefits of
interleaving in the literature on motor learning (e.g., Brady,
1998; Wulf & Shea, 2002), it seems likely that they do the
same for cognitive tasks. If so, the dosage of initial instruction
and blocked practice should interact with the benefits of interleaving, such that more pretraining should be required for
younger and less skilled students, as well as for more complex
tasks.
Consistent with this possibility are findings from Rau,
Aleven, and Rummel (2010), who used various practice schedules to help teach fifth and sixth graders about fractions. During practice, students were presented with different ways to
represent fractions, such as with pie charts, line segments, and
set representations. Practice was either blocked (e.g., students
worked with pie charts first, then line segments, and so on),
interleaved, or first blocked and then interleaved. The prepractice and postpractice criterion tests involved fractions.
Increases in accuracy from the prepractice test to the postpractice test occurred only after blocked and blocked-plus-interleaved practice (students in these two groups tended to perform
similarly), and then, these benefits were largely shown only
for students with low prior knowledge. This outcome provides
partial support for the hypothesis that interleaved practice may
be most beneficial only after a certain level of competency has
been achieved using blocked practice with an individual concept or problem type.
10.2b Student characteristics. The majority of studies on
interleaved practice have included college-aged students, and
across these studies, sometimes interleaved practice has
boosted performance, and sometimes it has not. Even so, differences in the effectiveness of interleaved practice for this
age group are likely more relevant to the kind of task employed
or, perhaps, to the dosage of practice, factors that we discuss in
other sections. Some studies have included college students
who were learning tasks relevant to their career goals—for
instance, engineering students who were learning to diagnose
system failures (e.g., de Croock, van Merriënboer, & Paas,
1998) and medical students who were learning to interpret
electrocardiograms (Hatala, Brooks, & Norman, 2003). We
highlight outcomes from these studies in the Materials subsection (10.2c) below. Finally, Mayfield and Chase (2002) conducted an extensive intervention to train algebra to college
students with poor math skills; interleaving was largely successful, and we describe this experiment in detail in the Effects
in Representative Educational Contexts subsection (10.3)
below.
Concerning younger students, as reported above, Taylor
and Rohrer (2010) reported that fourth graders benefited from
interleaved practice when they were learning how to solve
mathematical problems. In contrast, Rau et al. (2010) used
various practice schedules to help teach fifth and sixth graders
about fractions and found that interleaved practice did not
boost performance. Finally, Olina, Reiser, Huang, Lim, and
Park (2006) had high school students learn various rules for
comma usage with interleaved or blocked practice; higherskill students appeared to be hurt by interleaving (although
pretests scores favored those in the blocked group, and that
advantage may have carried through to the criterion test), and
interleaving did not help lower-skill students.
Improving Student Achievement 43
10.2c Materials. The benefits of interleaved practice have
been explored using a variety of cognitive tasks and materials,
from the simple (e.g., paired associate learning) to the relatively complex (e.g., diagnosing failures of a complicated
piece of machinery). Outcomes have been mixed. Schneider,
Healy, and Bourne (1998, 2002) had college students learn
French vocabulary words from different categories, such as
body parts, dinnerware, and foods. Across multiple studies,
translation equivalents from the same category were blocked
during practice or were interleaved. Immediately after practice, students who had received blocked practice recalled more
translations than did students who had received interleaved
practice (Schneider et al., 2002). One week after practice, correct recall was essentially the same in the blocked-practice
group as in the interleaved-practice group. In another study
(Schneider et al., 1998, Experiment 2), interleaved practice led
to somewhat better performance than blocked practice on a
delayed test, but this benefit was largely due to a slightly lower
error rate. Based on these two studies, it does not appear that
interleaved practice of vocabulary boosts retention.
More promising are results from studies that have investigated students’ learning of mathematics. We have already
described some of these studies above (Rohrer & Taylor, 2007;
Taylor & Rohrer, 2010; but see Rau et al., 2010). Other math
skills that have been trained include the use of Boolean functions (Carlson & Shin, 1996; Carlson & Yaure, 1990) and
algebraic skills (Mayfield & Chase, 2002). For the former,
interleaved practice improved students’ speed in solving multistep Boolean problems, especially when students could preview the entire multistep problem during solution (Carlson &
Shin, 1996). For the latter, interleaving substantially boosted
students’ ability to solve novel algebra problems (as we discuss in detail below).
Van Merriënboer and colleagues (de Croock & van Merriënboer, 2007; de Croock et al., 1998; van Merriënboer, de Croock,
& Jelsma, 1997; van Merriënboer, Schuurman, de Croock, &
Paas, 2002) trained students to diagnose problems that occurred
in a distiller system in which different components could fail;
practice at diagnosing failures involving each component was
either blocked or interleaved during practice. Across their studies, interleaved practice sometimes led to better performance on
transfer tasks (which involved new combinations of system failures), but it did not always boost performance, leading the
authors to suggest that perhaps more practice was needed to
demonstrate the superiority of interleaved practice (de Croock
& van Merriënboer, 2007). Blocked and interleaved practice
have also been used to train students to make complex multidimensional judgments (Helsdingen, van Gog, & van Merriënboer, 2011a, 2011b), with results showing that decision making
on criterion tests was better after interleaved than blocked practice. One impressive outcome was reported by Hatala et al.
(2003), who trained medical students to make electrocardiogram diagnoses for myocardial infarction, ventricular hypertrophy, bundle branch blocks, and ischemia. The criterion test was
on novel diagnoses, and accuracy was substantially greater after
interleaved practice (47%) than after blocked practice (30%).
Finally, interleaved practice has been shown to improve the
formation of concepts about artists’ painting styles (Kang &
Pashler, 2012; Kornell & Bjork, 2008) and about bird classifications (Wahlheim et al., 2011). The degree to which the benefits of interleaving improve concept formation across
different kinds of concepts (and for students of different abilities) is currently unknown, but research and theory by Goldstone (1996) suggest that interleaving will not always be
better. In particular, when exemplars within a category are dissimilar, blocking may be superior, because it will help learners
identify what the members of a category have in common. By
contrast, when exemplars from different categories are similar
(as with the styles of artists and the classifications of birds
used in the prior interleaving studies on concept formation),
interleaving may work best because of discriminative contrast
(e.g., Carvalho & Goldstone, 2011). These possibilities should
be thoroughly explored with naturalistic materials before any
general recommendations can be offered concerning the use of
interleaved practice for concept formation.
10.2d Criterion tasks. In the literature on interleaving, the
materials that are the focus of instruction and practice are used
as the criterion task. Thus, if students practice solving problems of a certain kind, the criterion task will involve solving
different versions of that kind of problem. For this reason, the
current section largely reflects the analysis of the preceding
section on materials (10.2c). One remaining issue, however,
concerns the degree to which the benefits of interleaved practice are maintained across time. Although the delay between
practice and criterion tests for many of the studies described
above was minimal, several studies have used retention intervals as long as 1 to 2 weeks. In some of these cases, interleaved practice benefited performance (e.g., Mayfield &
Chase, 2002; Rohrer & Taylor, 2007), but in others, the potential benefits of interleaving did not manifest after the longer
retention interval (e.g., de Croock & van Merriënboer, 2007;
Rau et al., 2010). In the latter cases, interleaved practice may
not have been potent at any retention interval. For instance,
interleaved practice may not be potent for learning foreignlanguage vocabulary (Schneider et al., 1998) or for students
who have not received enough practice with a complex task
(de Croock & van Merriënboer, 2007).
10.3 Effects in representative educational contexts. It
seems plausible that motivated students could easily use interleaving without help. Moreover, several studies have used procedures for instruction that could be used in the classroom
(e.g., Hatala et al., 2003; Mayfield & Chase, 2002; Olina et al.,
2006; Rau et al, 2010). We highlight one exemplary study
here. Mayfield and Chase (2002) taught algebra rules to college students with poor math skills across 25 sessions. In different sessions, either a single algebra rule was introduced or
previously introduced rules were reviewed. For review 
44 Dunlosky et al.
sessions, either the rule learned in the immediately previous
session was reviewed (which was analogous to blocking) or
the rule learned in the previous session was reviewed along
with the rules from earlier sessions (which was analogous to
interleaved practice). Tests were administered prior to training, during the session after each review, and then 4 to 9 weeks
after practice ended. On the tests, students had to apply the
rules they had learned as well as solve problems by using
novel combinations of the trained rules. The groups performed
similarly at the beginning of training, but by the final tests,
performance on both application and problem-solving items
was substantially better for the interleaved group, and these
benefits were still evident (albeit no longer statistically significant) on the delayed retention test.
10.4 Issues for implementation. Not only is the result from
Mayfield and Chase (2002) promising, their procedure offers
a tactic for the implementation of interleaved practice, both by
teachers in the classroom and by students regulating their
study (for a detailed discussion of implementation, see Rohrer,
2009). In particular, after a given kind of problem (or topic)
has been introduced, practice should first focus on that particular problem. After the next kind of problem is introduced
(e.g., during another lecture or study session), that problem
should first be practiced, but it should be followed by extra
practice that involves interleaving the current type of problem
with others introduced during previous sessions. As each new
type of problem is introduced, practice should be interleaved
with practice for problems from other sessions that students
will be expected to discriminate between (e.g., if the criterion
test will involve a mixture of several types of problems, then
these should be practiced in an interleaved manner during
class or study sessions). Interleaved practice may take a bit
more time to use than blocked practice, because solution times
often slow during interleaved practice; even so, such slowing
likely indicates the recruitment of other processes—such as
discriminative contrast—that boost performance. Thus, teachers and students could integrate interleaved practice into their
schedules without too much modification.
10.5 Interleaved practice: Overall recommendations. On
the basis of the available evidence, we rate interleaved practice as having moderate utility. On the positive side, interleaved practice has been shown to have relatively dramatic
effects on students’ learning and retention of mathematical
skills, and teachers and students should consider adopting it in
the appropriate contexts. Also, interleaving does help (and
rarely hinders) other kinds of cognitive skills. On the negative
side, the literature on interleaved practice is currently small,
but it contains enough null effects to raise concern. Although
the null effects may indicate that the technique does not consistently work well, they may instead reflect that we do not
fully understand the mechanisms underlying the effects of
interleaving and therefore do not always use it appropriately.
For instance, in some cases, students may not have had enough
instruction or practice with individual tasks to reap the benefits of interleaved practice. Given the promise of interleaved
practice for improving student achievement, there is a great
need for research that systematically evaluates how its benefits are moderated by dosage during training, student abilities,
and the difficulty of materials.
Closing Remarks
Relative utility of the learning techniques
Our goal was to provide reviews that were extensive enough to
allow anyone interested in using a particular technique to
judge its utility for his or her own instructional or learning
goals. We also realized that offering some general ratings (and
the reasons behind them) might be useful to readers interested
in quickly obtaining an overview on what technique may work
best. To do so, we have provided an assessment of how each
technique fared with respect to the generalizability of its
benefits across the four categories of variables listed in
Table 2, issues for implementation, and evidence for its effectiveness from work in representative educational contexts (see
Table 4). Our goal for these assessments was to indicate both
(a) whether sufficient evidence is available to support conclusions about the generalizability of a technique, issues for its
implementation, or its efficacy in educational contexts, and, if
sufficient evidence does exist, (b) whether it indicates that the
technique works.3
 For instance, practice testing received an
assessment of Positive (P) for criterion tasks; this rating indicates that we found enough evidence to conclude that practice
testing benefits student performance across a wide range of
criterion tasks and retention intervals. Of course, it does not
mean that further work in this area (i.e., testing with different
criterion tasks) would not be valuable, but the extent of the
evidence is promising enough to recommend it to teachers and
students.
A Negative (N) rating indicates that the available evidence
shows that the learning technique does not benefit performance for the particular category or issue. For instance, despite
its popularity, highlighting did not boost performance across a
variety of criterion tasks, so it received a rating of N for this
variable.
A Qualified (Q) rating indicates that both positive and negative evidence has been reported with respect to a particular
category or issue. For instance, the keyword mnemonic
received a Q rating for materials, because evidence indicates
that this technique does work for learning materials that are
imagery friendly but does not work well for materials that cannot be easily imagined.
A rating of Insufficient (I) indicates that insufficient evidence is available to draw conclusions about the effects of a
given technique for a particular category or issue. For instance,
elaborative interrogation received an I rating for criterion tasks
because we currently do not know whether its effects are durable across educationally relevant retention intervals. Any cell 
Improving Student Achievement 45
in Table 4 with an I rating highlights the need for further systematic research.
Finally, some cells include more than one rating. In these
cases, enough evidence exists to evaluate a technique on one
dimension of a category or issue, yet insufficient evidence is
available for some other dimension. For instance, self-explanation received a P-I rating for criterion tasks because the
available evidence is positive on one dimension (generalizability across a range of criterion tasks) but is insufficient on
another key dimension (whether the benefit of self-explanation generalizes across longer retention intervals). As another
example, rereading received a Q-I rating for criterion tasks
because evidence for the effectiveness of this technique over
long retention intervals is qualified (i.e., under some learning
conditions, it does not produce an effect for longer retention
intervals), and insufficient evidence is available that is relevant to its effectiveness across different kinds of criterion
tasks (e.g., rereading does boost performance on recall tasks,
but little is known as to its benefits for comprehension). When
techniques have multiple ratings for one or more variables,
readers will need to consult the reviews for details.
Finally, we used these ratings to develop an overall utility
assessment for each of the learning techniques. The utility
assessments largely reflect how well the benefits of each learning technique generalize across the different categories of
variables (e.g., for how many variables the technique received
a P rating). For example, the keyword mnemonic and imagery
use for text learning were rated low in utility in part because
their effects are limited to materials that are amenable to imagery and because they may not work well for students of all
ages. Even so, some teachers may decide that the benefits of
techniques with low-utility ratings match their instructional
goals for their students. Thus, although we do offer these easyto-use assessments of each learning technique, we also encourage interested teachers and students to carefully read each
review to make informed decisions about which techniques
will best meet their instructional and learning goals.
Implications for research on learning
techniques
A main goal of this monograph was to develop evidence-based
recommendations for teachers and students about the relative
utility of various learning techniques. A related goal was to
identify areas that have been underinvestigated and that will
require further research before evidence-based recommendations for their use in education can be made. A number of these
gaps are immediately apparent upon inspection of Table 4. To
highlight a few, we do not yet know the extent to which many
of the learning techniques will benefit students of various
ages, abilities, and levels of prior knowledge. Likewise, with a
few exceptions (e.g., practice testing and distributed practice),
the degree to which many of the techniques support durable
learning (e.g., over a number of weeks) is largely unknown,
partly because investigations of these techniques have typically involved a single session that included both practice and
criterion tests (for a discussion of the limitations of such single-session research, see Rawson & Dunlosky, 2011). Finally,
few techniques have been evaluated in representative educational contexts.
This appraisal (along with Table 4) suggests two directions
for future research that could have immediate implications for
education. First, more research is needed to fully explore the
degree to which the benefits of some techniques generalize to
the variables listed in Table 2. Particularly important will be
investigations that evaluate the degree to which interactions
among the variables limit or magnify the benefits of a given
technique. Second, the benefit of most of the techniques in
representative educational settings needs to be more fully
explored. Easy-to-use versions of the most promising techTable 4. Utility Assessment and Ratings of Generalizability for Each of the Learning Techniques
Technique Utility Learners Materials
Criterion
tasks
Issues for
implementation
Educational
contexts
Elaborative interrogation Moderate P-I P I P I
Self-explanation Moderate P-I P P-I Q I
Summarization Low Q P-I Q Q I
Highlighting Low Q Q N P N
The keyword mnemonic Low Q Q Q-I Q Q-I
Imagery use for text learning Low Q Q Q-I P I
Rereading Low I P Q-I P I
Practice testing High P-I P P P P
Distributed practice High P-I P P-I P P-I
Interleaved practice Moderate I Q P-I P P-I
Note: A positive (P) rating indicates that available evidence demonstrates efficacy of a learning technique with respect to a given variable or issue. A
negative (N) rating indicates that a technique is largely ineffective for a given variable. A qualified (Q) rating indicates that the technique yielded positive
effects under some conditions (or in some groups) but not others. An insufficient (I) rating indicates that there is insufficient evidence to support a
definitive assessment for one or more factors for a given variable or issue.
46 Dunlosky et al.
niques should be developed and evaluated in controlled investigations conducted in educationally representative
contexts. Ideally, the criterion measures would include highstakes tests, such as performance on in-class exams and on
achievement tests. We realize that such research efforts can be
time-consuming and costly, but conducting them will be crucial for recommending educational changes that will have
a reasonable likelihood of improving student learning and
achievement.
Implications for students, teachers, and student
achievement
Pressley and colleagues (Pressley, 1986; Pressley, Goodchild,
et al., 1989) developed a good-strategy-user model, according
to which being a sophisticated strategy user involves “knowing the techniques that accomplish important life goals (i.e.,
strategies), knowing when and how to use those methods . . .
and using those methods in combination with a rich network
of nonstrategic knowledge that one possesses about the world”
(p. 302). However, Pressley, Goodchild, et al. (1989) also
noted that “many students are committed to ineffective strategies . . . moreover, there is not enough professional evaluation
of techniques that are recommended in the literature, with
many strategies oversold by proponents” (p. 301). We agree
and hope that the current reviews will have a positive impact
with respect to fostering further scientific evaluation of the
techniques.
Concerning students’ commitment to ineffective strategies,
recent surveys have indicated that students most often endorse
the use of rereading and highlighting, two strategies that we
found to have relatively low utility. Nevertheless, some students do report using practice testing, and these students
appear to benefit from its use. For instance, Gurung (2005)
had college students describe the strategies they used in preparing for classroom examinations in an introductory psychology course. The frequency of students’ reported use of practice
testing was significantly correlated with their performance on
a final exam (see also Hartwig & Dunlosky, 2012). Given that
practice testing is relatively easy to use, students who do not
currently use this technique should be able to incorporate it
into their study routine.
Why don’t many students consistently use effective techniques? One possibility is that students are not instructed
about which techniques are effective or how to use them effectively during formal schooling. Part of the problem may be
that teachers themselves are not told about the efficacy of various learning techniques. Given that teachers would most likely
learn about these techniques in classes on educational psychology, it is revealing that most of the techniques do not
receive sufficient coverage in educational-psychology textbooks. We surveyed six textbooks (cited in the Introduction),
and, except for mnemonics based on imagery (e.g., the keyword mnemonic), none of the techniques was covered by all of
the books. Moreover, in the subset of textbooks that did
describe one or more of these techniques, the coverage in most
cases was relatively minimal, with a brief description of a
given technique and relatively little guidance on its use, effectiveness, and limitations. Thus, many teachers are unlikely
getting a sufficient introduction to which techniques work best
and how to train students to use them.
A second problem may be that a premium is placed on
teaching students content and critical-thinking skills, whereas
less time is spent teaching students to develop effective techniques and strategies to guide learning. As noted by McNamara (2010), “there is an overwhelming assumption in our
educational system that the most important thing to deliver to
students is content” (p. 341, italics in original). One concern
here is that students who do well in earlier grades, in which
learning is largely supervised, may struggle later, when they
are expected to regulate much of their own learning, such as in
high school or college. Teaching students to use these techniques would not take much time away from teaching content
and would likely be most beneficial if the use of the techniques
was consistently taught across multiple content areas, so that
students could broadly experience their effects on learning and
class grades. Even here, however, recommendations on how to
train students to use the most effective techniques would benefit from further research. One key issue concerns the earliest
age at which a given technique could (or should) be taught.
Teachers can expect that upper elementary students should be
capable of using many of the techniques, yet even these students may need some guidance on how to most effectively
implement them. Certainly, identifying the age at which students have the self-regulatory capabilities to effectively use a
technique (and how much training they would need to do so)
is an important objective for future research. Another issue is
how often students will need to be retrained or reminded to use
the techniques to ensure that students will continue to use
them when they are not instructed to do so. Given the promise
of some of the learning techniques, research on professional
development that involves training teachers to help students
use the techniques would be valuable.
Beyond training students to use these techniques, teachers
could also incorporate some of them into their lesson plans.
For instance, when beginning a new section of a unit, a teacher
could begin with a practice test (with feedback) on the most
important ideas from the previous section. When students are
practicing problems from a unit on mathematics, recently
studied problems could be interleaved with related problems
from previous units. Teachers could also harness distributed
practice by re-presenting the most important concepts and
activities over the course of several classes. When introducing
key concepts or facts in class, teachers could engage students
in explanatory questioning by prompting them to consider
how the information is new to them, how it relates to what
they already know, or why it might be true. Even homework
assignments could be designed to take advantage of many of
these techniques. In these examples (and in others provided in
the Issues for Implementation subsections), teachers could 
Improving Student Achievement 47
implement a technique to help students learn, regardless of
whether students are themselves aware that a particular technique is being used.
We realize that many factors are responsible whenever any
one student fails to achieve in school (Hattie, 2009) and hence
that a change to any single factor may have a relatively limited
effect on student learning and achievement. The learning techniques described in this monograph will not be a panacea for
improving achievement for all students, and perhaps obviously, they will benefit only students who are motivated and
capable of using them. Nevertheless, when used properly, we
suspect that they will produce meaningful gains in performance in the classroom, on achievement tests, and on many
tasks encountered across the life span. It is obvious that many
students are not using effective learning techniques but could
use the more effective techniques without much effort, so
teachers should be encouraged to more consistently (and
explicitly) train students to use learning techniques as they are
engaged in pursuing various instructional and learning goals.
Acknowledgments
We thank Reed Hunt, Mark McDaniel, Roddy Roediger, and Keith
Thiede for input about various aspects of this monograph. We appreciate constructive comments about a draft from Sean Kang, Alexsa
MacKendrick, Richard Mayer, Hal Pashler, Dan Robinson, and Doug
Rohrer. Thanks also to Robert Goldstone, Detlev Leutner, and Doug
Rohrer for providing details of their research, and to Melissa Bishop
and Cindy Widuck for technical support.
Declaration of Conflicting Interests
The authors declared that they had no conflicts of interest with
respect to their authorship or the publication of this article.
Funding
This research was supported by a Bridging Brain, Mind and Behavior
Collaborative Award through the James S. McDonnell Foundation’s
21st Century Science Initiative.
Notes
1. We also recommend a recent practice guide from the U.S. Institute
of Education Sciences (Pashler et al., 2007), which discusses some
of the techniques described here. The current monograph, however,
provides more in-depth and up-to-date reviews of the techniques and
also reviews some techniques not included in the practice guide.
2. Although this presentation mode does not involve reading per se,
reading comprehension and listening comprehension processes are
highly similar aside from differences at the level of decoding the perceptual input (Gernsbacher, Varner, & Faust, 1990).
3. We did not include learning conditions as a category of variable in
this table because the techniques vary greatly with respect to relevant
learning conditions. Please see the reviews for assessments of how
well the techniques generalized across relevant learning conditions.