The Nature of Procrastination 1
Running head: PROCRASTINATION
The Nature of Procrastination: A Meta-Analytic and Theoretical Review of Quintessential SelfRegulatory Failure
Steel, P. (2007). The nature of procrastination. Psychological Bulletin, 133(1), 65-94.
The Nature of Procrastination 2
Abstract
Procrastination is a prevalent and pernicious form of self-regulatory failure that is not entirely
understood. Hence, the relevant conceptual, theoretical, and empirical work is reviewed, drawing
upon correlational, experimental, and qualitative findings. A meta-analysis of procrastination‟s
possible causes and effects, based on 691 correlations, reveals that neuroticism, rebelliousness,
and sensation seeking show only a weak connection. Strong and consistent predictors of
procrastination were task aversiveness, task delay, self-efficacy, impulsiveness, as well as
conscientiousness and its facets of self-control, distractibility, organization, and achievement
motivation. These effects prove consistent with Temporal Motivation Theory, an integrative
hybrid of expectancy theory and hyperbolic discounting. Continued research into procrastination
should not be delayed, especially since its prevalence appears to be growing.
Keywords: Procrastination, irrational delay, pathological decision-making, meta-analysis
The Nature of Procrastination 3
The Nature of Procrastination: A Meta-Analytic and Theoretical Review of Quintessential SelfRegulatory Failure
Procrastination is extremely prevalent. Although virtually all of us have at least dallied
with dallying, some have made it a way of life. Estimates indicate that 80% to 95% of college
students engage in procrastination (Ellis & Knaus, 1977; O‟Brien, 2002), approximately 75%
consider themselves procrastinators (Potts, 1987), and almost 50% procrastinate consistently and
problematically (Day, Mensink, & O‟Sullivan, 2000; Haycock, 1993; Micek, 1982;
Onwuegbuzie, 2000a; Solomon & Rothblum, 1984). The absolute amount of procrastination is
considerable, with students reporting that it typically occupies over one third of their daily
activities, often enacted through sleeping, playing or TV watching (Pychyl, Lee, Thibodeau, &
Blunt, 2000). Furthermore, these percentages appear to be on the rise (Kachgal, Hansen, &
Nutter, 2001). In addition to being endemic during college, procrastination is also widespread in
the general population, chronically affecting some 15-20% of adults (Harriott & Ferrari, 1996;
“Haven‟t Filed Yet,” 2003).
Procrastination also appears to be a troubling phenomenon. People most strongly
characterize it as being bad, harmful, and foolish (Briody, 1980), and over 95% of
procrastinators wish to reduce it (O‟Brien, 2002). Justifying this viewpoint, several studies have
linked procrastination to individual performance, with the procrastinator performing more poorly
overall (Beswick, Rothblum, & Mann, 1988; Steel, Brothen, & Wambach, 2001; Wesley, 1994);
and to individual well-being, with the procrastinator being more miserable in the long-term
(Knaus, 1973; Lay & Schouwenburg, 1993; Tice & Baumeister, 1997). For example, a survey by
H&R Block indicates that procrastinating on taxes costs people on average $400 due to rushing
and consequent errors, resulting in over $473 million dollars in overpayments in 2002 (Kasper, 
The Nature of Procrastination 4
2004). Similarly, the medical field reports that procrastination on the part of patients is a major
problem (e.g., Morris, Menashe, Anderson, Malinow, & Illingworth, 1990; White, Wearing, &
Hill, 1994); this is also reflected in the meta-analytic work of Bogg and Roberts (2004).
A variety of other fields repeat this theme, that procrastination is dangerous. In
economics, Akerlof (1991) and O‟Donoghue and Rabin (1999) consider the relative lack of
retirement savings behavior as a form of procrastination, where many start preparing for their
later years far too late. In the political arena, procrastination has been used to describe both
Presidential decisions (Farnham, 1997; Kegley, 1989) and the banking practices of nations
(Holland, 2001), in which important decisions are disastrously delayed. At larger levels of
analysis, Gersick (1989) describes how teams consistently delay the bulk of their work until
deadlines approach.
Unfortunately for such an extensive and potentially harmful phenomenon, much has yet
to be learned about the causes of procrastination, although there have been some notable reviews.
Ferrari, Johnson, and McCown‟s (1995) book on the topic is extensive but focuses primarily on
measurement and theory, with less emphasis on empirical findings. On the other hand, van Eerde
(2003) did conduct a meta-analysis on procrastination; although statistically solid, it is also
limited in scope. Based on 88 articles, it does not incorporate environmental variables (e.g., task
effects) or non-correlational findings (e.g., experimental or survey results), does not consider
several personality facets (e.g., extraversion or impulsiveness) or theoretical foundations, and
does not include a moderator search or account for attenuation effects. Finally, a book by
Schouwenburg, Lay, Pychyl, and Ferrari (2004) reviews the topic but focuses primarily on
technical expositions of procrastination treatment programs for academic counselors. 
The Nature of Procrastination 5
Consequently, there is a need for a comprehensive and detailed examination of the
research on procrastination. With such a review, we can better elucidate the nature of
procrastination, understanding when and why it occurs as well as how to prevent it. The goal of
this paper, then, is threefold. The first goal is to establish the nature of procrastination
conceptually. Exactly what is it that we are examining? This step involves integrating the many
different descriptions of procrastination into a single coherent definition, showing that this
definition is consistent with the history of procrastination, and then placing procrastination
among related concepts.
With this conceptual foundation, the second goal is to explore broadly the causes and
correlates of procrastination, that is, to establish its nomological web. These relationships are
subsequently tested through meta-analytic review and consideration of relevant descriptive and
experimental studies. Finally, these necessarily wide-ranging results need to be integrated. The
findings are evaluated with respect to Temporal Motivation Theory (Steel & König, in press), a
recent integrative motivational model that seeks to explain self-regulatory behavior in a way that
is consistent with a wide variety of theoretical perspectives (e.g., economics, personality,
expectancy theory, goal setting).
Definition of Procrastination
Procrastination is occasionally used in a positive sense. Several writers have mentioned it
as a functional delay or as avoiding rush (e.g., Bernstein, 1998; Chu & Choi, 2005; Ferrari,
1993b). For example, Bernstein (1998) explains: “Once we act, we forfeit the option of waiting
until new information comes along. As a result, no-acting has value. The more uncertain the
outcome, the greater may be the value of procrastination [italics added]” (p. 15). However, the 
The Nature of Procrastination 6
positive form of procrastination, as the subsequent historical analysis indicates, is secondary in
usage. The focus of this paper is on the primary, negative form of procrastination.
Like many common-language terms drafted into scientific study, definitions for
procrastination tend to be almost as plentiful as the people researching this topic (see Ferrari et
al., 1995). Initially, such definitional variation may seem to obscure the nature of procrastination,
but it may also serve partially to illuminate it. Different attempts to refine our understanding can
be complementary rather than contradictory. In addition, any common theme likely reveals a
core or essential element. It is evident that all conceptualizations of procrastination recognize
that there must be a postponing, delaying, or putting off a task or a decision, in keeping with the
term‟s Latin origins of “pro,” meaning “forward, forth, or in favor of,” and “crastinus,” meaning
“of tomorrow” (Klein, 1971).
Building on this base, we procrastinate when we delay beginning or completing an
intended course of action (Beswick & Mann, 1994; Ferrari, 1993a; Lay & Silverman, 1996;
Milgram, 1991; Silver & Sabini, 1981). This is a useful distinction, as there are thousands of
potential tasks that we could be doing at any time, and it becomes cumbersome to think that we
are putting them all off. The distinction also separates procrastination from simple decision
avoidance (Anderson, 2003), where people‟s original intention is to delay.
In addition, procrastination is most often considered to be the irrational delay of behavior
(Akerlof, 1991; Burka & Yuen, 1983; Ellis & Knaus, 1977; Silver & Sabini, 1981), which
reflects the dictionary definition: “defer action, especially without good reason” (Oxford English
Reference Dictionary, 1996). Being irrational entails choosing a course of action despite
expecting that it will not maximize your utilities, that is your interests, preferences, or goals of
both a material (e.g., money) and a psychological (e.g., happiness) nature. Combining these 
The Nature of Procrastination 7
elements suggests that to procrastinate is to voluntarily delay an intended course of action despite
expecting to be worse off for the delay.
History of Procrastination
Readers interested in the history of procrastination might seek a book by Ringenbach
(1971), cited by Knaus (1979), but this search is not recommended. Aitken‟s (1982) investigation
reveals that the work was never actually written. Her correspondence with Paul Ringenbach and
the publisher reveals that it was actually an elaborate joke (i.e., a book on procrastination that
was never completed). See also Kaplan (1998) for a similar well-conducted academic
article/prank on procrastination (i.e., note the reference to the Stilton and Edam authors who
“researched” using cheese to assess procrastination in mice). The first actual historical analysis
on procrastination was written by Milgram (1992), who argues that technically advanced
societies require numerous commitments and deadlines, which give rise to procrastination.
Consequently, undeveloped agrarian societies are not so afflicted. In their book, Ferrari et al.
(1995) take a similar although softened stand. They contend that procrastination has existed
throughout history but that it only acquired truly negative connotations with the advent of the
industrial revolution (circa 1750). Before then, procrastination was viewed neutrally and could
be interpreted as a wise course of (in)action. On balance, there may be some truth to the notion
that procrastination is a modern malady, as self-reports of procrastination indicate that it may be
on the rise (Kachgal et al., 2001). Despite this increase, historical references indicate that our
views about procrastination have been reasonably constant over the ages: it is and has long been
a prevalent problem.
Starting from the Industrial Revolution, Samuel Johnson (1751) described procrastination
as “one of the general weaknesses, which, in spite of the instruction of moralists, and the 
The Nature of Procrastination 8
remonstrances of reason, prevail to a greater or less degree in every mind.” A contemporary of
Johnson, Phillip Stanhope (1749), Earl of Chesterfield, advised, “No idleness, no laziness, no
procrastination; never put off till tomorrow what you can do today.”
Clearly preceding the Industrial Revolution was a sermon written by a Reverend Walker
(1682), who made it quite clear that procrastination is extremely sinful, that he and other
ministers had rallied their congregations against it repeatedly, and that other texts were available
that spoke similarly.
1
John Lyly, an English novelist patronized by Queen Elizabeth I, was
known for his 1579 work Eupheus, a book that relied heavily on proverbs for its content. In it
Lyly noted, “Nothing so perilous as procrastination” (1579/1995).
A search of classical texts yields several illuminating references to the nature of
procrastination. In 44 BC, Cicero was the consul of Rome, its highest political office, and an
infamous orator who spoke against several political opponents, such as Marcus Antonius (i.e.,
Mark Antony), who later had Cicero killed. In one of a series of speeches denouncing Antonius,
Cicero stated, “In the conduct of almost every affair slowness and procrastination are hateful”
(Philippics, 6.7). Roughly 400 years earlier, Thucydides also wrote about procrastination. An
Athenian general who wrote extensively on the war with the Spartans, including various aspects
of personalities and strategies, Thucydides mused that procrastination is the most criticized of
character traits, useful only in delaying the commencement of war so as to allow preparations
that speed its conclusion (Histoires, 1.84.1). Finally, writing around 800 BC, Hesiod, one of the
first recorded poets of Greek literature, provides one of the earliest possible citations. His words
are worth repeating in full: 
The Nature of Procrastination 9
Do not put your work off till to-morrow and the day after; for a sluggish worker does not
fill his barn, nor one who puts off his work: industry makes work go well, but a man who
puts off work is always at hand-grips with ruin. (Works and Days, l. 413)
The Bhagavad Gita provides an additional Eastern reference. Written in approximately 500 BC,
it is considered the most widely read and influential spiritual text of Hinduism (Gandhi,
Strohmeier, & Nagler, 2000). Within it, Krishna maintains: “Undisciplined, vulgar, stubborn,
wicked, malicious, lazy, depressed, and procrastinating; such an agent is called a Taamasika
agent” (18.28). Of special note, Taamasika people are considered so lowly that mortal rebirth is
denied to them; rather, they go to hell.
Given this consistency of opinion, stretching thousands of years, procrastination must be
considered an almost archetypal human failing. Therefore it is rather surprising and ironic that
science did not address procrastination sooner.
Procrastination as a Personality Trait
Whether procrastination can also be considered a trait is an empirical question: Does
people‟s level of procrastination show consistency across time and situation? There has been
sufficient research to address this issue, and it suggests procrastination has sufficient crosstemporal and situational stability. To begin with, there appears to be a biological or genetic
component to procrastination. A recent study by Arvey, Rotundo, Johnson, and McGue (2003)
asked 118 identical and 93 fraternal male twins reared in the same family to indicate the degree
to which they were a “procrastinator.” The intraclass correlations for this item were .24 for
identical twins, and .13 for the fraternal twins, suggesting that approximately 22% of the
variance on this item was associated with genetic factors.2 Nine short-term studies (N = 928)
were located that had test-retest reliability data. After an average span of 42 days between 
The Nature of Procrastination 10
assessments, the average correlation was .73. In addition, Elliot (2002) managed to obtain longterm test-retest data for 281 participants who took the Adult Inventory of Procrastination. With a
hiatus of 10 years, the correlation was .77, a further indication that procrastination is sufficiently
stable to be a trait.
Given that procrastination reflects personality, the focus then moves to where it fits in the
nomological web, particularly the five-factor model. Conceptually, there is also considerable
overlap with conscientiousness. For example, Costa and McCrae‟s (1992) self-discipline scale, a
facet of conscientiousness, contains several items strongly reminiscent of procrastination itself
(e.g., “I waste a lot of time before settling down to work.”). Similarly, Schouwenburg (2004)
concludes:
Various studies show a very distinct clustering of related traits: trait procrastination, weak
impulse control, lack of persistence, lack of work discipline, lack of time management
skill, and the inability to work methodically. In this constellation, there seems little
justification for viewing procrastination as a separate trait. It is possibly more fruitful to
label this cluster as (lack of) self-control. (p. 8)
Despite this overlap, conscientiousness is a broader construct. It has been defined with
terms as varied as conformity, socially prescribed impulse control, achievement orientation,
cautiousness, morality, organization, thoroughness, and reliability (Costa, McCrae, & Dye, 1991;
Goldberg, 1993; Hogan & Ones, 1997). Recent work by Parish (2004) as well as Roberts,
Chernyshenko, Startk, and Goldberg (2005) has tried to clarify the nature of conscientiousness
with focused exploratory and confirmatory factor analyses along with criterion validation. In
each case, a comprehensive list of conscientiousness-related items was administered to over 700
participants, revealing that the conscientiousness trait is composed of as many as six factors. 
The Nature of Procrastination 11
From both of these lists, the first major factor best represents procrastination. For the work of
Roberts et al., the first major factor is labeled Industriousness and represents rationality,
efficiency, and hard work. For Parish, the factor is labeled Responsibility and its connection to
procrastination is explicit; it is defined as the “The Diligent Fulfillment of Objectives.”
Furthermore, Responsibility (i.e., procrastination) also has the most uniformly strong association
with workplace deviance and academic performance. Consequently, procrastination may be
considered to be the most central facet of conscientiousness, but it is not conscientiousness itself.
The Causes and Correlates of Procrastination
The amount of empirical work that has been done on procrastination is considerable.
Researchers have been prolific in exploring different possible connections and correlates. This
body of work is ideal in establishing procrastination‟s nomological web, but summarizing this
extensive body of work is a challenge. Initially, the results are divided into four major sections:
Task Characteristics, Individual Differences, Outcomes, and Demographics. Task Characteristics
indicate possible environmental causes of procrastination. The Individual Differences section
deals with relevant personality traits and is organized into the traditional five-factor model.
Outcomes indicate the proximal effects of procrastination. Finally, the Demographics section
reviews possible physical and cohort moderators. Each section is then subdivided into more
specific constructs, which are reviewed along with their relevant theory. The relationships
covered are then subsequently considered in the meta-analytic review.
Task Characteristics
Procrastination involves the voluntary choice of one behavior or task over other options.
Consequently, we cannot irrationally delay all our tasks, but simply favor some over others.
Unless we procrastinate randomly, the nature of the task itself must then have some effect upon 
The Nature of Procrastination 12
our decisions. True to this conclusion, in Briody‟s (1980) study, about 50% of people responded
that their procrastination was due to some task characteristic. Two predictable environmental
factors have been suggested: timing of rewards and punishments, and task aversiveness.
Timing of Rewards and Punishments
It has long been observed that the further away an event is temporally, the less impact it
has upon our decisions (e.g., Lewin, 1935). Ainslie (1975) gives a historical account of this
phenomenon from a predominantly psychological perspective under the rubric of impulsiveness,
while Loewenstein (1992) traces its roots from a predominantly economic standpoint in terms of
temporal discounting. Support for this effect is bountiful, with sufficient research to place it
formally as one of the psychological laws of learning (Schwartz, 1989) or the dominant
economic model of intertemporal choice or discounted utility (Loewenstein & Elster, 1992).
Given this foundation, it is not surprising that it has also been used to explain procrastination.
In his essay on procrastination, Samuel Johnson (1751) posits temporal proximity as a
cause in that it is natural “to be most solicitous for that which is by its nearness enabled to make
the strongest impressions.” More recently, this preference for the present has been resurrected by
O‟Donoghue and Rabin (1999), who used the economic discounted utility model to describe
various forms of human procrastination, such as our tendency to save inadequately for
retirement.
Task Aversiveness
Task aversiveness is almost a self-explanatory term. Also known as dysphoric affect
(Milgram, Sroloff, & Rosenbaum, 1988) or task appeal (Harris & Sutton, 1983), it refers to
actions that we find unpleasant. Its relationship is predictable. By definition, we seek to avoid
aversive stimuli, and consequently, the more aversive the situation, the more likely we are to 
The Nature of Procrastination 13
avoid it (e.g., procrastinate). Although the extent to which we dislike a task may be influenced by
a variety of personal characteristics (e.g., boredom proneness, intrinsic motivation), if we do find
the task unpleasant, research indicates that we are indeed more likely to put it off. Of note, task
aversiveness needs the previous concept, the timing of rewards and punishment, to account for
procrastination. By itself, it primarily predicts only task avoidance, not task delay.
Individual Differences
Attempts to specify the relationship between procrastination and individual differences
have been abundant. To help organize the suspected correlates, traits are organized into the
traditional five-factor model (Digman, 1990). Still, several researchers have focused their work
on a single facet of a trait, such as impulsiveness. Since the field of personality lacks definitive
terminology at the facet level (John & Sanjay, 1999), this situation generates an unwieldy
number of relationships and creates some confusion about what facets should be associated with
any specific trait. To reduce redundancy and illuminate potential patterns, facets that share a
similar theoretical association with procrastination are grouped for discussion.
Consequently, results are clustered into the following groups. Neuroticism is considered
along with four of its facets: I) Irrational Beliefs, II) Self-Efficacy & Self-Esteem, III) SelfHandicapping, and IV) Depression. Similarly, the trait Extraversion is reviewed along with three
of its facets: I) Positive Affect, II) Impulsiveness, and III) Sensation Seeking. Agreeableness is
considered only at the trait level, as is Openness to Experience, although Intelligence/Aptitude is
also discussed alongside it but analyzed separately. Finally, Conscientiousness is considered
along with several constructs related to self-regulation: I) Distractibility, II) Organization, III)
Achievement Motivation, and IV) Intention-Action Gap.
The Nature of Procrastination 14
Neuroticism
Similar in etiology to task aversiveness, neuroticism has also been explored as a source of
procrastination. Neuroticism is very similar to worrying, trait anxiety, or negative affect.
Typically, researchers argue that if people procrastinate on tasks because they are aversive or
stressful, then those who are more susceptible to experiencing stress should procrastinate more
(e.g., Brown, 1991; Burka & Yuen, 1983; Ellis & Knaus, 1977). Consequently, the highly
anxious, who can find cataclysmic interpretations in benign events, should be irrationally putting
off many of life‟s large and little duties.3
Irrational beliefs.
Irrational belief, cognition, or thought is a broad term that includes several dysfunctional
or anxiety-provoking worldviews. Ellis (1973) characterizes them as (1) almost certainly
hindering the pursuit of happiness and fulfillment of desires, and (2) almost completely arbitrary
and not amenable to proof or disproof. Since these beliefs create anxiety, their relationship to
procrastination is similar to that of neuroticism; they make certain tasks increasingly unpleasant.
Aitken (1982) explains:
The higher the possibility of rejection (real or imagined), the more likely it is that the
individual will experience anxiety as he approaches the task. Since even thinking about
the project evokes feeling of anxiety, the procrastinator starts an alternate task or
distraction. (p. 32)
Of all possible irrational beliefs, Knaus (1973) argues that only two are closely related to
procrastination: believing oneself to be inadequate, and believing the world to be too difficult
and demanding. Researchers have followed in Ellis‟s (1973) and Knaus‟s (1973) footsteps by
investigating among procrastinators the prevalence of irrational beliefs as well as four specific 
The Nature of Procrastination 15
manifestations. Particularly close attention has been paid to fear of failure, perfectionism, selfconsciousness, and evaluation anxiety, all reasons related to worry about receiving harsh
appraisal (Beck, Koons, & Milgrim, 2000; Burka & Yuen, 1984; Ellis & Knaus, 1977; Schlenker
& Weigold, 1990).
Low self-efficacy and low self-esteem.
As fear of failure was associated with neuroticism, so it is connected with both low selfefficacy and low self-esteem (Ellis & Knaus, 1977). Specifically, people suffering from irrational
beliefs may doubt their ability to do well (i.e., low self-efficacy) and believe that any failure to
perform to standard suggests inadequacy as a person (i.e., low self-esteem). Independent of fear
of failure, self-efficacy and self-esteem have also been argued to have direct links to
procrastination and performance (Bandura, 1997; Burka & Yuen, 1983; Judge & Bono, 2001).
Self-handicapping.
Procrastinators may feel that their actions will not change their situation, and thus they
concentrate instead on managing their emotional reactions to the situation. Consequently, to
cope, they tend to use an emotion-oriented rather than a task-oriented style (Berzonsky, 1992;
Flett, Blankstein, & Martin, 1995). A particularly well researched form of this emotion-focused,
dysfunctional self-regulation is self-handicapping, that is, placing obstacles that hinder one‟s
own good performance. The motivation for self-handicapping is often to protect one‟s selfesteem by giving oneself an external reason, an “out,” if one fails to do well (Jones & Berglas,
1978; Smith, Snyder, & Handelsman, 1982). Self-handicapping is also associated with a
diffuse/avoidant identity style (Berzonsky, 1992), a personality type that seeks to avoid relevant
information about oneself.
The Nature of Procrastination 16
From a conceptual standpoint, however, it is debatable whether self-handicapping could
potentially cause or reflect procrastination. As Brown and Marshall (2001) discuss, an honest
attempt at the task for people with low self-efficacy and self-esteem promises the gain of a little
pride if they succeed, although at the risk of significant shame and humiliation if they fail. Given
their “bounded” although perhaps faulty worldview, it is to their benefit not to make an
unambiguous bid at succeeding. Their “procrastination” is then done purposefully, to maximize
their overall utility, and should not be considered an irrational delay. Given that this is a nuanced
point, delays due to procrastination or to self-handicapping should be behaviorally similar, and
we can expected them to be empirically related.
Depression.
Depression, low energy, learned helplessness, and pessimism are closely related to each
other and to neuroticism, irrational beliefs, and low self-efficacy or self-esteem. Beck (1993), for
example, describes depression as being due to irrational beliefs that result in pessimism and selfdislike. Similarly, several studies have shown that neuroticism greatly increases susceptibility to
depression (Ruiz-Caballero & Bermudez, 1995; Saklofske, Kelly, & Jansen, 1995). Costa and
McCrae (1992) go so far as to include depression as a facet of neuroticism in their personality
scale. Several researchers argue that learned helplessness and pessimism are strongly connected
to depression, both theoretically and empirically (Abramson, Metalsky, & Alloy, 1989; Peterson,
Colvin, & Lin, 1992). In addition, McCown, Johnson, and Petzel (1989) conducted a principal
components analysis on several psychological inventories administered to a group of
procrastinators. They found that depressed affect, neuroticism, and diminished feelings of control
over the situation tended to load together, indicating that collectively they could represent at least
one of the causes of procrastination. 
The Nature of Procrastination 17
Clinical depression has several characteristics that make it a likely suspect for causing
procrastination. Depressed people are often unable to take pleasure in life‟s activities, tend to
lack energy, and have problems concentrating (DSM-IV, 1994), all symptoms that make task
completion difficult. The Beck Depression Inventory (Beck & Beck, 1972) even includes an item
reminiscent of procrastination: “I put off making decisions more than I used to.” As energy
wanes, working apparently becomes painful or more difficult (Baumeister, Heatherton, & Tice,
1994). Burka and Yuen (1983) also discuss the fact that, when we are tired, it is harder to initiate
tasks.
Openness to Experience: Intelligence/Aptitude
Openness to experience is sometimes referred to as culture, intellect, or need for
cognition. As McCrae (1996) describes it, “Openness is a broad and general dimension, seen in
vivid fantasy, artistic sensitivity, depth of feeling, behavioral flexibility, intellectual curiosity,
and unconventional attitudes” (p. 323). Also, of the big-five personality traits, openness shows
the strongest relationship with intelligence and scholastic aptitude (Beier & Ackerman, 2001),
which are consequently summarized here. No direct relationship has yet been posited between
openness or intelligence and procrastination, and accordingly, none is expected.
Agreeableness
According to the clinical literature (Burka & Yuen, 1983; Knaus, 1979), rebelliousness,
hostility, and disagreeableness are thought to be major motivations for procrastination. Those
with these personality traits are more likely to experience externally imposed schedules as
aversive and thus to avoid them. By delaying work and starting it on one‟s own schedule, one
also reasserts one‟s autonomy. The possibility of this etiology has led to the development of
paradoxical treatments; for example, people are directed to procrastinate and, when they rebel 
The Nature of Procrastination 18
against this directive, they start work early (e.g., Mulry, Fleming, & Gottschalk, 1994; ShohamSalomon, Avner, & Neeman, 1989).
Extraversion
Extraversion is one of the more interesting possible causes of procrastination, but also
one of the more complicated. Extraverts are usually described as sociable, optimistic, outgoing,
energetic, expressive, exciting, and impulsive (Brand, 1997; Guilford, 1977). Note that the exact
definition of impulsiveness and its structure wanders somewhat, as well as which personality
trait it best represents (Revelle, 1997). Typically, impulsiveness indicates spontaneity and a
tendency to act upon whims and inclinations.
Some aspects of extraversion have already been discussed. Although pessimism and low
energy level are aspects of depression, they are also a central part of extraversion, especially as
measured by positive emotionality or affect (Watson & Clark, 1997). These preliminary findings
demonstrate some of the complexities of extraversion as procrastination‟s hypothesized
relationships with these facets conflict. Both lethargy and impulsiveness are expected to predict
procrastination, but lethargy indicates a lack of extraversion, while impulsiveness suggests an
abundance of the trait. In keeping with this inconsistency, no significant results are expected for
extraversion.
Impulsiveness.
Where trait anxiety is perceived as representing the “behavioral inhibition system” or
BIS, impulsiveness is primarily seen as representing the “behavioral activation system” or BAS
(Pickering, Corr, Powell, Kumari, Thorton, & Gray, 1997). The BAS acts to motivate people in
their pursuit of rewarding experiences and is a necessary cognitive component for proper 
The Nature of Procrastination 19
functioning. However, an overactive BAS should result in characteristics such as rapid decisionmaking and shorter attention spans, which in turn may increase procrastination.
Impulsive people may be more likely to procrastinate, as they are likely beset with
desires of the moment and focus their attention upon them (Blatt & Quinn, 1967). Given that
thoughts of the future do not weigh heavily in their decisions, they often pursue immediate
gratification, neglecting or ignoring longer-term responsibilities. Consequently, impulsiveness is
similar to the construct of present time orientation.
Sensation seeking.
Sensation seeking, like impulsiveness, is also interpreted as the result of an overactive
behavioral activation system. People high in this trait are easily bored and long for excitement,
and thus they may intentionally put off work in order to feel the tension of working close to a
deadline. Their delays may be more purposefully planned than those of the purely impulsive;
thus the rationality of this strategy, and consequently whether it should be considered
procrastination, is debatable. Feasibly, this tactic could actually add significant pleasure and
increase performance (Revelle, 1997; Sommer, 1990); without it, work could become tedious
and slogging. However, Ainslie (1992) argues that the habit of sensation seeking may also
become addictive, resulting in ever-increasing delays as we begin to relish ever-increasing risks.
Ultimately, sensation-seekers may find that their pleasure has been bought with substantially
diminished performance and long-term regret.
Conscientiousness
As mentioned, procrastination is conceptually representative of low conscientiousness
and self-regulatory failure. Consequently, it should show strong associations with these
variables. However, several other constructs should also demonstrate substantive relationships. 
The Nature of Procrastination 20
Ideally, procrastination should be associated with distractibility, poor organization, low
achievement motivation, and an intention-action gap. That each of these constructs represents
low conscientiousness or self-regulatory failure is reviewed in the following, as well as their
theoretical connection to procrastination.
Distractibility.
It has long been noted that attention is critical to self-control. Sigmund Freud
(1923/1961) and William James (1890) speak to this point, and more recent prominent
researchers such as Austin and Klein (1996), Simon (1994), and Kuhl (2000) maintain this view.
By way of an explanation, Klinger (1996, 1999) indicates that changes in flow of thought are
preceded by an emotionally arousing cue. Consequently, management of distracting cues could
facilitate the prevention of procrastination so that one either fails to encode these cues or limits
their processing so that they are not fully valued.
Organization.
Organization refers to ordering, structuring, and planning one‟s life. It is a key selfregulatory technique that can reduce procrastination in several ways. For example, organization
may contribute to goal setting (Locke & Latham, 1990), gap reflection (Oettingen, 1996), or
automatic habits that preclude the decision to do otherwise (Bargh & Barndollar, 1996).
Achievement motivation.
Another aspect of conscientiousness that should be strongly related to procrastination is
achievement motivation. Those high in achievement motivation set more difficult goals for
themselves and often enjoy performance for its own sake (Costa & McCrae, 1992; Spence &
Helmreich, 1983). Achievement motivation may affect procrastination by making work
intrinsically engaging and thus necessarily less aversive. However, it is important to note that 
The Nature of Procrastination 21
achievement motivation is not limited to intrinsic motivation, and it may incorporate extrinsic
elements as well.
Intention-action gap.
The intention-action gap refers to the degree to which people follow up on their original
work plans. Most procrastination researchers suppose that delaying is not only irrational but also
unintentional (e.g., Silver & Sabini, 1981). They believe that procrastinators do not purposefully
put off their chores, but do so to the contrary of their original intent – an “is” versus “ought”
scenario. As van Hooft, Born, Taris, van der Flier, and Blonk (2005) summarize the issue, “If the
delay in action were intended, we would not regard it to be procrastination. Therefore, trait
procrastination can be viewed as a moderator in the relation between implementation intentions
and behavior” (p. 244). Failing to act upon one‟s intentions is quintessentially self-regulatory
failure (Rachlin, 2000), almost the definition of low self-control.
Outcomes
To the degree that we are self-interested, self-regulatory failure is associated with
diminished overall utility, in terms of both mood and performance. Conceptually, procrastination
is strongly related to conscientiousness, which itself is consistently linked to better performance
(Barrick & Mount, 2003; Hurtz & Donovan, 2000). Consequently, procrastinators should tend to
be worse off, in terms of both how they feel and what they achieve. Each of these outcomes is
discussed in more detail.
Mood
Procrastination has long been viewed as a way of temporarily evading anxiety that
unfortunately becomes compounded when later faced (Mayers, 1946; Solomon & Rothblum,
1984). Thus procrastination may initially improve mood but should worsen it later. This opens 
The Nature of Procrastination 22
the possibility of a deviation-amplifying loop, specifically a depression spiral (Lindsay, Brass, &
Thomas, 1995). Given that depression may lead to procrastination and can be characterized as
extended period of negative affect, a poor mood may itself may not only result from
procrastination, but also create it.
Performance
Although it is argued that procrastination leads to poorer performance, some people
report using procrastination as performance enhancing strategy; it helps get them to marshal their
resources to cope with an oncoming deadline (Chissom & Iran-Nejad, 1992; Tice & Baumeister,
1997). However, if procrastination is irrational as well as representative of low
conscientiousness, this “last-ditch” effort should tend to be less successful than efforts made well
before the last minute. As with mood, poor performance permits the possibility of reciprocal
relationships, such as self-efficacy related failure spirals (Lindsay et al., 1995). That is,
procrastination may lead to poorer performance, which lowers self-efficacy, which in turn leads
to more procrastination.
Demographics
It is unlikely that any personality trait is homogenously distributed throughout a
population. Fortunately, researchers have consistently provided the information needed to
evaluate three possible demographic moderators of procrastination: age, sex, and year.
Age
People should procrastinate less as they age and learn. As O‟Donoghue and Rabin (1999)
conclude, “Many people who procrastinate only moderately do so not because of intrinsic selfcontrol, but because they have developed schemes to overcome procrastination” (p. 807). It is
evident that we can learn to avoid procrastination. Ainslie (1992) and Baumeister et al. (1994) 
The Nature of Procrastination 23
review considerable research showing that people tend to procrastinate less with repeated
practice.
Sex
The anticipated influence of sex on procrastination is difficult to predict. Previous
investigation into gender differences and the related construct of self-control have found mixed
results (Feingold, 1994). Men may score higher, lower, or the same as women depending on the
measure. However, meta-analytic results do show that girls score higher on effortful control than
boys (Else-Quest, Hyde, Goldsmith, & Van Hulle, 2006). On balance then, we could expect
procrastination to be weakly associated with males.
Year
As previously mentioned, Kachgal et al. (2001) believe that procrastination is on the rise.
This would be consistent with the increase in other forms of self-regulatory failure (e.g., obesity,
gambling, excessive debt) over the last 25 years (Griffith & Parke, 2002; Sivy, 2000; Wadden,
Brownell, & Foster, 2002). Since cohort effects in personality do appear to exist (e.g., Roberts,
Walton, & Viehtbauer, 2006) and since procrastination may be susceptible to environmental
influences (e.g., task aversiveness), such an increase is a definite possibility. However, although
self-reports provide the best available data for studying the historical prevalence of
procrastination, it is always possible that any observed trend represents changes in cultural
response sets (e.g., a greater willingness to admit procrastination) rather than reflecting a true
change in underlying behavior.
Temporal Motivation Theory
As van Eerde (2003) concluded in her review, “A more comprehensive theoretical
framework of procrastination is still needed” (p. 1412). One promising candidate is Temporal 
The Nature of Procrastination 24
Motivation Theory (Steel & König, in press), a synthesis of traditional, well-established
motivational formulations that include time as a fundamental term. An integration of this type
has been proposed by several authors (Loewenstein & Prelec, 1992; Rachlin, 1990;
Schouwenburg & Groenewoud, 1997), including Akerlof (1991), the Nobel Prize winning
economist. This synthesis addresses a major problem in psychology, as Staats (1999) concludes:
“The task that will not go away and that, until faced, will sentence psychology to the ranks of
„would-be science‟ – is that of unification, of weaving threads together” (p. 8). Similarly, as
Zeinder, Boekaerts, and Pintrich (2000) indicate specifically for the self-regulatory literature,
“The fragmentation and disparate, but overlapping, lines of research within the self-regulation
domain have made any attempt at furthering our knowledge an arduous task” (p. 753).4
Elements of Temporal Motivation Theory are derived primarily from expectancy theory
and hyperbolic discounting, although it can be applied to need theory, prospect theory,
psychobiology, and goal setting theory. Its simplest formulation is:
ii
i
i
EV Utility
D
Utility refers to how desirable a task or choice is. By definition, we pursue whatever behavior
has the highest utility. As the numerator of the equation indicates, activities that are high in
Expectancy (E) and Value (V) should be more desirable. The denominator of the equation
captures the element of time. Enjoyable activities that are immediately realizable (D), that have a
short delay, should be more highly valued. As delay becomes large, utility necessarily shrinks.
refers to the person‟s sensitivity to delay, and the larger becomes, the greater is the sensitivity.
To apply the equation to punishments rather than rewards, merely take its reciprocal. In other
words, we prefer our punishers to be distant, unlikely, and small. 
The Nature of Procrastination 25
Figure 1 illustrates how TMT can account for procrastination. It maps the changing levels
of utility, the desire to perform, for Thomas Delay. He is a college student who has been
assigned an essay on September 15th, the start of a semester, due on December 15th, when the
course ends. To simplify matters, Tom has two choices over the course of his semester, studying
versus socializing. Tom likes to socialize, but he likes to get good grades even more. However,
since the positive component of socializing is perpetually in the present, it maintains a uniformly
high utility evaluation. The reward of writing is initially temporally distant, diminishing its
utility. Only towards the deadline do the effects of discounting decrease, and writing becomes
increasingly likely. In this example, the switch in motivational rank occurs on December 3rd
,
leaving just 12 days for concentrated effort.
To demonstrate TMT‟s validity, each of its four components should show strong
correlations with procrastination, as shown in Table 1. To begin with, Expectancy is most
strongly represented by self-efficacy, which is a broader but closely related concept (Bandura,
1997). As is typical in the procrastination literature, self-efficacy is assessed primarily for the
academic and work domains. Second, Value is represented by three major variables. It is directly
expressed by Task Aversiveness. The more unpleasant a task, the more likely we will put it off.
Also, Need for Achievement should be negatively associated with procrastination. Those high in
the need for achievement are more likely to enjoy working for its own sake. Similarly, Boredom
Proneness should be negatively associated, since boredom makes work less pleasant. Of note,
neuroticism is not expected to affect procrastination. For anxiety to have an effect, according to
TMT, it must differentially affect some tasks and not others. For the example of Thomas Delay
(see Figure 1), free-floating anxiety will decrease the utility of writing but will also drop the 
The Nature of Procrastination 26
utility of socializing by an equal amount, leaving the intersection between the two lines
unchanged.
Third, several variables should be associated with sensitivity to delay. The individual
difference variables of Distractibility, Impulsiveness, and Self-Control are all associated with
(Ainslie, 1975; Madden, Petry, Badger, & Bickel, 1997; Ostaszewski, 1996, 1997; Petry, 2001;
Richard, Zhang, Mitchell, & de Wit, 1999). As people become more impulsive or distractible,
the likelihood that they will procrastinate should increase. Also, age should be negatively
correlated with procrastination, since Green, Fry, and Myerson (1994) found that temporal
discounting tends to decrease with age.
Fourth, Delay is directly expressed by Timing of Rewards and Punishments.
Procrastinators should work very hard, but only just before the deadline. Furthermore,
Organization, especially as represented by goal setting (Steel & König, in press), may effectively
shorten the delays by the creation of proximal goals, thus increasing work effort. In addition, a
necessary outcome of hyperbolic time-discounting is an Intention-Action Gap (e.g., Loewenstein
& Elster, 1992; Read, 2001). When choices are made regarding distal courses of action, the
effect of delay is minimal. Our decisions, consequently, tend to be more rational, reflecting just
the magnitude of reward. As time progresses, however, delays shorten and their effects become
more pronounced. Consequently, our original intentions can suddenly change and we find
ourselves pursuing smaller but more readily realizable rewards. Figure 2, using TMT, shows how
intentions to spend or save money (as represented by the utility concept along the y-axis) can
switch merely as a function of delay.
Aside from this convergent validation, this meta-analysis provides considerable
discriminant validity for Temporal Motivation Theory as well. There are strong theoretical 
The Nature of Procrastination 27
traditions suggesting that procrastination is due to neurotic or rebellious elements, upon which
much of clinical practice is based. TMT indicates that these other variables should not be
associated or at most be weakly associated with procrastination. Consequently, positing a lack of
a relationship is also a strong test of the theory.
Method
Article Search
Explorations into procrastination have cut across a variety of fields, including
psychology, sociology, political science, and economics, requiring a broad search to gather the
appropriate publications. As an initial resource, the Procrastination Research Group (2002) has
attempted to maintain a list of articles, chapters, books, and dissertations on procrastination and
maintains a copy on-line. Although admirably extensive, this list is incomplete, especially in
regards to articles from the fields further from psychology. To supplement this list, the following
steps were taken.
First, several databases were searched. For all available years to present, the computer
databases of ABI/INFORM, EconLit, ERIC, MEDLINE, PsychINFO, Proquest Digital
Dissertations, and the Academy of Management Online Article Retrieval System were explored,
primarily using the keywords procrastination, dynamic inconsistency, temporal discounting, and
hyperbolic discounting.
Second, the Social Sciences Citation Index (i.e., Web of Science) was searched for all
publications that cited an article regarding procrastination assessment. Specifically, these
included Academic Procrastination Scale (APS; Milgram & Toubiana, 1999), Adult Inventory of
Procrastination (AIP; McCown & Johnson, 1989), Aitken Procrastination Inventory (API;
Aitken, 1982), Decisional Procrastination Questionnaires (DPQI, DPQII; Mann, 1982; Mann et 
The Nature of Procrastination 28
al., 1997), General Procrastination Scale (GPS; Lay, 1986), Procrastination Assessment ScaleStudents (PASS; Solomon & Rothblum, 1984), Procrastination Log – Behavior (Lopez &
Wambach, 1982), Procrastination Self-Statement Inventory (PSSI; Grecco, 1984), Test
Procrastination Questionnaire (TPQ; Kalechstein, Hocevar, Zimmer, & Kalechstein, 1989), and
Tuckman Procrastination Scale (TPS; Tuckman, 1991).
Third, if an author was found to have published more than one article on procrastination,
the author was contacted where possible. This was done in order to uncover individual research
programs on procrastination (i.e., “file drawer” problem).
Fourth, once procrastination-focused references were obtained, each publication‟s
reference list was also examined for other publications. Masters and doctoral dissertations were
included in this review as well as unpublished works, when the requisite author was reachable
and responsive. Foreign-language articles were also included. In total, 553 sources were initially
identified for review.
Usable data included effect sizes involving a measure of procrastination that are
expressed as bivariate correlations or are derivable from (e.g., t-score, d-score or F-score). After
excluding those that mentioned procrastination peripherally or failed to provide data (e.g.,
counseling case studies of procrastination), this review considers 216 separate works: 7 book
chapters, 7 conference proceedings, 3 unpublished papers, 5 electronic sources, 141 journal
articles, and 53 theses. In total, 691 independent correlations are reported. All studies were
double-coded and discrepancies resolved to ensure accuracy. Measures were sorted into their
appropriate traits and categories through analytic discussion (e.g., by reviewing the scale
description and items). Where consensus could not be reached, measures were excluded. A list
reflecting how all measures were sorted is available on request. 
The Nature of Procrastination 29
In addition to study results that can be reduced to single bivariate correlations and
consequently meta-analytic summary, procrastination has been examined with a wide variety of
other methodologies. These include longitudinal and experimental research designs, as well as
statistical techniques such as structural equation modeling and factor analysis. Also employed
was survey research regarding why people procrastinate, and hypothetical scenarios regarding
where and how people typically would report procrastination. This body of research provides
further insights and is incorporated in this review.
Meta-Analytic Method
The summary of the results primarily follows the Hunter and Schmidt (1990)
psychometric meta-analytic procedure. It is designed for estimating the mean effect size and the
amount of residual variance in observed scores after considering artifacts, usually sampling error
and unreliability. Mean effects sizes are expressed as correlations, consequently requiring the
conversion of t-scores, d-scores, and F-scores where necessary and possible. For all variables,
corrections were employed for dichotomizing a continuous score, uneven splits, range restriction
as well as range enhancement, which is similar to range restriction except that one selects only
extreme scores. When a study used multiple measures of procrastination or of another target
variable, these were averaged so that only one independent correlation was included in the
analysis.
The confidence interval refers to the precision with which the expected mean effect is
measured; consistent with the random effects model, the heterogeneous form is employed here
(Whitener, 1990). The credibility interval refers to the limits within which an observed effect
will likely be in any particular population, that is the degree of generalizability. It is based on the 
The Nature of Procrastination 30
residual variance after accounting for sampling error (i.e., SDr.) and, in this study, unreliability
(i.e., SDρ.). Large credibility intervals indicate the presence of moderator effects.
The meta-analytic method used here does differ from that of Hunter and Schmidt (1990)
in one respect. Their equation for estimating SDr (i.e., moderator effect, between-studies
variance), which determines the width of the credibility intervals, tends to underestimate as the
number of studies decreases (Cornwell & Ladd, 1993; Hall & Brannick, 2002; Steel &
Kammeyer-Mueller, 2002). This bias is primarily due to using the sample-size weighted mean
correlation in place of true , which, if it could be obtained, would give a less biased finding.
Brannick (2001) offers a simple fix to this problem that is consistent with the random effects
model and other variance estimates (e.g., the standard deviation): multiply the original variance
figure by K/(K-1). This correction is employed.
Finally, for estimating the effects of unreliability, Hunter and Schmidt (1990) suggest that
the reliability of scales may be obtained from studies other than those used in any specific
analysis. Consequently, the reliability of each measure for each study was based upon the
sample-size weighted average of all studies using that scale within this meta-analysis. When no
study provided the needed reliability, the sample-size weighted average of similar measures was
employed. This allowed the reliability correction to be conducted on an individual study level
rather than through artifact distribution. As is typical, refers to the reliability corrected, samplesize weighted, mean effect size.
Moderator Search
Although it is unlikely that all of the variance in results can be accounted for, it can be
substantially reduced through a moderator search. At a minimum, Wortman (1994) recommends
investigating differences in methodology. On this point there is little variance, with most studies 
The Nature of Procrastination 31
using a correlational design based on self-reports. This leads to the possibility of system-wide
mono-method bias (i.e., Campbell & Fiske, 1959), although this has been addressed in specific
studies (e.g., Scher & Osterman, 2002; Steel et al., 2001), with effects ranging from none to
weak depending upon the variable examined (e.g., self-reports generate very similar results to
other-reports). Still, several methodological variables can be considered. As is typical in many
research venues, most of the studies employed young university students. To address whether
this is a limitation to the generalizability of the findings, a moderator search based on age of
participant was conducted. In addition, the studies were coded according to whether the samples
represented student, general, or adolescent/child populations. It is also possible that some studies
were conducted more carefully than others. Since the difficulty of estimating study quality is
extreme (Wortman, 1994), it is fortunate that this issue is more relevant for experimentally based
meta-analyses. Most of the results here are based on a relatively straightforward correlational
design, and quality should not have a substantial impact. Still, study results were coded as being
from journals and non-journals as well as published and non-published, with the expectation that
journal and published articles on average are of better quality. Also, extreme correlations were
examined to determine if they represented outliers, as per Huffcutt and Arthur (1995). Studies
that had a sample-adjusted meta-analytic deviancy of four or higher were excluded from the
analysis, although at times it was possible to check and correct such extreme scores with the lead
author. In this way, two typographical errors were detected where the sign of the correlation was
reversed in print.
Ultimately, the impact of methodological differences was minimal. Neither age, nor
journal status, nor group significantly moderated any relationships. Publication bias was
detected, but for only two of the relationships, neuroticism and irrational beliefs. Published 
The Nature of Procrastination 32
works tended to have .06 and .09 higher correlations, respectively, than unpublished. There was
one other detectable source of variance: the measures employed. This is a common issue during
meta-analysis (Doty & Glick, 1998), as similar, although not identical, indices were grouped
together to reduce redundancy. For example, the average disattenuated correlation among the
procrastination measures was .70, which reflects substantial similarity, justifying aggregation,
but also possible differences. To determine whether different scales or tests used had a
substantive effect, the following moderator searches were conducted: i) Impulsive versus NonImpulsive Neuroticism, ii) Perfectionism versus Irrational Beliefs, iii) Extraversion versus
Positive Affect, iv) Boredom Proneness versus Sensation Seeking, and v) Need for Achievement
versus Intrinsic Motivation.
There are a variety of techniques for detecting these possible moderators during metaanalysis. Recent work by Steel and Kammeyer-Mueller (2002) indicates that weighted least
squares (WLS) regression provides the most accurate results. Consequently, WLS is employed
here, with categorical variables dummy coded. As recommended (Tabachnick & Fidell, 1989),
analysis is limited to when there are at least five cases (K) per moderator variable. Results are
reported where statistically significant (p<.01).
Results
The meta-analytic results are reported in the same subsections used in the literature
review and are summarized in Tables 2 to 6. Also reported in these subsections are the results
from other methodologies (e.g., experiments, surveys).
Task Nature and Procrastination
Two task characteristics are thought to affect procrastination. First, we tend to favor tasks
that are more pleasant in the short-term, even if they are detrimental to ourselves in the long-
The Nature of Procrastination 33
term. Second, the more intrinsically unpleasant a task is, the more likely we are to avoid doing it.
However, only task aversiveness proved amenable to meta-analytic summary, and its results are
reported in Table 2.
Timing of Rewards and Punishments
Although research has been performed on temporal effects specific to procrastination, it
has not been correlational and thus is not summarized meta-analytically. Still, the results do
support a strong relationship. Mazur (1996, 1998) experimentally investigated procrastination in
animals, finding that pigeons will indeed put off doing a small amount of work now for a delayed
reward, in favor of having to do much more work later for the same result. Also, self-report
methodology indicates the importance of temporal proximity. When students were asked how
much they would procrastinate under various conditions, they indicated that their procrastination
would diminish as the task nears completion or as a deadline approaches (Schouwenburg &
Groenewoud, 2001; Strongman & Burt, 2000).
Task Aversiveness
The importance of task aversiveness in triggering procrastination has received strong
support from a variety of research methodologies. To this end, several researchers administered
the Procrastination Assessment Scale-Students. Part of this instrument asks respondents to
indicate why, out of 26 possible reasons, they might procrastinate in writing a term paper. Factor
analysis of responses consistently generates a dimension best described as “Aversiveness of
Task,” with its most popular item, “Really dislike writing term papers,” endorsed by 45% of the
respondents (Kachgal et al., 2001; Peterson, 1987; Rawlins, 1995; Solomon & Rothblum, 1984).
Using comparable formats, several researchers found that two top-rated reasons for
procrastinating before performing a task were that the task was unpleasant, or that it was boring 
The Nature of Procrastination 34
and uninteresting (Anderson, 2001; Briody, 1980; Froelich, 1987; Haycock, 1993). Using an
open-ended format, Ferrari (1993a) elicited a similar reason why people shopped late for
Christmas: they disliked shopping.
In addition, aversiveness has been investigated for several different types of tasks,
including personal projects, daily tasks, academic tasks (such as publication), and job search
behaviors. This research has employed a variety of methodologies, including the more rigorous
formats of time sampling and daily logs (Ferrari & Scher, 2000; Pychyl et al., 2000).
Consistently and strongly, the more people dislike a task, the more they consider it effortful or
anxiety producing, the more they procrastinate (
r
=.40, K=8). Interestingly, two moderators of
this effect are reported. First, aversiveness effects intensify if the projects are short-term (Lay,
1987, 1990). Second, this relationship between procrastination behavior and task aversiveness is
moderated by conscientiousness, with low conscientiousness apparently increasing the effect of
task pleasantness on procrastination (Lay & Brokenshire, 1997; see also Somers, 1992). The
correlation between trait procrastination and finding tasks aversive in general is also strong and
stable (
r
=.40, K=10). This correlation indicates that one possible reason why some people
procrastinate more is simply that they find more of life‟s chores and duties aversive.5
Finally, several researchers have considered what type of task adversiveness is best
correlated with procrastination. Jobs characterized by lower autonomy, task significance, and
feedback were likely to increase decisional procrastination (Lonergan & Maher, 2000), although
they were less related to behavioral procrastination (Coote-Weymann, 1988; Galué, 1990).
Instead, behavioral procrastination was most strongly associated with the aversive task
components of frustration, resentment, and particularly boredom (Ackerman & Gross, 2005;
Blunt & Pychyl, 2000; Briody, 1980; Haycock, 1993; Puffer, 1989; Strongman & Burt, 2000). 
The Nature of Procrastination 35
Similar results were found using experimental methodology (Senécal, Lavoie, & Koestner, 1997;
Sigall, Kruglanski, & Fyock, 2000). The more boring and difficult a task was made, the more
likely people were to delay doing it.
Individual Differences
Individual Differences is the largest of the sections, dealing with the results for a wide
range of variables. Tables 3 through 5 meta-analytically summarize all these findings.
Neuroticism
The results for neuroticism and its facets are summarized in Table 3. Despite generating a
weak positive correlation (
r
=.24, K=59), it is at best very weakly associated with
procrastination. To begin with, a weak positive correlation between neuroticism and
procrastination should be expected due to method effects alone. Those who are more anxious or
have more negative affect tend to be harsher judges of their own behavior, but are not necessarily
poorer performers (Carver & Scheier, 1990; Ellis, 1989; Sarason, Sarason, & Pierce, 1990). That
neuroticism appears to be essentially unrelated to observed procrastination (Steel et al., 2001; or
fear of failure, Ackerman & Gross, 2005) supports this assertion.
Furthermore, neuroticism‟s connection to procrastination appears to be primarily due to
impulsiveness, not anxiety. Results analyzed at the facet level indicated that neuroticism‟s
connection to procrastination was “largely a matter of impulsiveness” (Schouwenburg & Lay,
1995, p. 488; see also Johnson & Bloom, 1995), and that it added little unique variance over
conscientiousness. More recently, structural equation modeling analysis indicates that
neuroticism has no direct links to procrastination and that any relationship is fully mediated by
conscientiousness (Lee, Kelly, & Edwards, 2006). Support for this conclusion can be found by
segmenting the results specific to neuroticism by measure: the EPQ (Eysenck & Eysenck, 1975), 
The Nature of Procrastination 36
the BPP (Harary & Donahue, 1994), and the BFI (John, Donahue, & Kentle, 1991) do not nest
impulsiveness with neuroticism to the same extent as the NEO (Costa & McCrae, 1992) or the
EPI (Eysenck & Eysenck, 1964). Examining the studies that used the non-impulsive related
measures suggests a mean correlation of only .16, while examination of those that used the
impulsive measures suggests a mean correlation of .33. Using WLS regression, this is a
significant difference (F(1,18)=47.84, p<.001).
Finally, there are two other anxiety-related issues. First, McCown et al. (1987) reported a
curvilinear relationship between neuroticism and procrastination that explained approximately
61% of the variance. This is an extremely strong finding, but not equally robust. Unfortunately,
no supporting result has been reported in any subsequent work (Johnson & Bloom, 1995;
Schouwenburg & Lay, 1995; Steel et al., 2001), and the original work of McCown et al. could be
considered anomalous. Second, Blatt and Quinn (1967) argued that procrastination was due to a
form of anxiety, specifically fear of death. Testing this, Donovan (1995) found a correlation of
.28 between procrastination and the Death Anxiety Scale, which is not significantly different
from the results obtained for general anxiety.
Irrational beliefs.
Although clinical work stresses that irrational beliefs are a major source of
procrastination, results are irregular and often weak. Meta-analytic review indicates that the
average correlation is .17 (K=71). However, significantly weaker as well as stronger results have
been obtained with two different specific forms of irrational beliefs.
Using WLS regression, self and other perfectionism proved to be much lower
(F(1,67)=11.53, p<.001) than other forms of irrational beliefs. Only socially prescribed
perfectionism, where we believe that significant others have set standards for us, is even weakly 
The Nature of Procrastination 37
related to procrastination (
r
=.18; analyzed with other fear of failure constructs). According to
Haycock (1993), only 7% of people surveyed report perfectionism as contributing to their
procrastination. In addition, the Almost Perfect Scale (Slaney, Ashby, & Trippi, 1995) of
perfectionism has four items related to procrastination. As found by Enns and Cox (2002) and
Slaney, Rice, and Ashby (2002), perfectionists generally scored the same or lower on
procrastination than non-perfectionists, the exception being perfectionists who were also seeking
clinical counseling.
However, WLS regression indicates that somewhat stronger results were obtained with
more general irrational belief scales (F(1,67)=5.73, p=.02), such as the Self-Critical Cognition
Scale (Ishiyama & Munson, 1993). Other research also indicates that irrational beliefs do appear
to be the source of at least some procrastination. Solomon and Rothblum (1984) extracted a fear
of failure dimension from a factor analysis of 26 procrastination reasons, a finding repeatedly
replicated (Brownlow & Reasinger, 2000; Clark & Hill, 1994; Harrington, 2005; Milgram,
Marshevsky, & Sadeh, 1995; Onwuegbuzie, 2000b; Peterson, 1987; Rawlins, 1995;
Schouwenburg, 1992). The dimension consists of evaluation anxiety, low self-confidence, and
perfectionism. Its most popular item was endorsed by approximately 17% of respondents
(Kachgal et al., 2001; Solomon & Rothblum 1984). A typical item is “Were concerned you
wouldn‟t meet your own expectations.” Generating a similar finding, although using an openended questionnaire, Briody (1980) and Haycock (1993) found respectively that 16% and 7% of
people gave fear of failure as a reason. This discrepancy between correlational and frequency
data likely indicates a form of counterbalancing; people may also cite fear of failure as a reason
for not procrastinating. Using an experimental design, Senécal et al. (1997) found further 
The Nature of Procrastination 38
support. Procrastinators are more likely to put off difficult and boring tasks when they expect to
be evaluated.
Low self-efficacy and low self-esteem.
Both variables were associated with procrastination, both in the expected direction and to
the expected degree. Self-efficacy showed the strongest relationship, with meta-analytic review
giving its average correlation as -.38 (K=39). Two other studies support of the importance of
self-efficacy. Briody (1980) found 8% of respondents stating that low self-confidence was a
cause of procrastination. Micek (1982) found that procrastinators were more likely to give up on
their efforts when encountering an obstacle (r=.40). For self-esteem, the average correlation was
similarly negative, but weaker at -.27 (K=33).
Self-handicapping.
The average correlation between self-handicapping and procrastination is .46 (K=16). As
additional evidence, procrastinators tend to spend more time on projects if they are likely to fail,
while the opposite relationship is seen for non-procrastinators (Lay, 1990). Similarly,
procrastinators were experimentally shown to enter voluntarily into conditions or to engage in
activities that self-handicapped their performance on evaluative tests (Ferrari, 1991c; Ferrari &
Tice, 2000). However, Lay, Knish, and Zanatta (1992) found several divergent relationships
between self-handicappers and procrastinators, indicating that although the two overlap
conceptually, they are different. While self-handicappers and procrastinators may both delay
their efforts, self-handicappers are more likely to engage in other forms of self-handicapping
(e.g., avoid practicing for a test). 
The Nature of Procrastination 39
Depression.
As summarized, depression is associated with procrastination, demonstrating an average
correlation of .28 (K=56). Aside from depression in general, several studies have focused on one
of its symptoms, lethargy or lack of energy. Tiredness is one of the top three reasons that
students give for putting off work (Strongman & Burt, 2000). Approximately 28% of students
indicated “Didn‟t have enough energy to begin the task” as a source of procrastination (Kachgal
et al., 2001; Peterson, 1987; Solomon & Rothblum, 1984). Notably, this item was also associated
with others indicating task aversiveness.
Other research regarding the relationship between procrastination and pessimism or
optimism indicates that this facet of depression may be too complex to be described in a general
linear fashion. Although the results for pessimism were not significantly different from those for
general depression, Sigall et al.‟s (2000) experimental investigation indicates that it is possible to
be too optimistic. They found that extremely optimistic participants were more likely to
procrastinate in initiating an aversive task. An examination of their expectations indicates that
they thought they could delay and still finish before the deadline. This finding is similar to Day
et al.‟s (2000) description of the socially active optimistic, who are confident in their ability to
delay their work successfully until later.
Openness to Experience: Intelligence/Aptitude
The results for openness to experience and intelligence/aptitude are summarized in Table 4.
Openness to experience shows a scant correlation of .03 (K=16). Similarly, the relationship for
intelligence/aptitude is low at .03 (K=14).
The Nature of Procrastination 40
Agreeableness
Meta-analytically, the average correlation of agreeableness is -.12 (K=24), as per Table 4.
However, Kachgal et al. (2000) and Solomon and Rothblum (1984) did extract through factor
analysis a dimension titled “Rebellion against Control” when examining reasons for
procrastinating. Still, its most popular item, “You resented people setting deadlines for you,” was
endorsed by under 5% of respondents.6
Extraversion
The results for extraversion and its facets are summarized in Table 4. For extraversion
specifically, they are extremely weak, with a correlation of -.12 (K=27). Furthermore, findings
specific to positive affect may potentially show more consistent results, since positive affect
emphasizes the energy rather than the impulsivity component of extraversion. Accordingly,
confining the meta-analysis to positive affect reveals a correlation of -.17 (K=12). As WLS
regression indicates, it is marginally stronger (F(1,28)=4.34, p=.04) than measures specific to
trait extraversion (
r =-11, K=18). On the other hand, there appear to be aspects of extraversion
that lead to procrastination. McCown et al. (1989), using principal components analysis, describe
a type of procrastinator as extraverted and outgoing. Similarly, Briody (1980), Froelich (1987),
Haycock (1993), and Strongman and Burt (2000) all indicate that a common distraction, social
activities with friends, facilitates procrastination. Finally, Senécal, Julien, and Guay (2003) found
a correlation of .30 between procrastination and a measure of role conflict due to interpersonal
relationships.
Impulsiveness.
Evidence suggests that impulsiveness plays a solid role in procrastination. As reviewed,
the average correlation between procrastination and impulsiveness is .41 (K=22). Other research 
The Nature of Procrastination 41
using related criteria provides additional confirmation. Procrastinators tend not to have a future
temporal orientation (Lasane & Jones, 2000; Specter & Ferrari, 2000) and tend to dislike
structure or routine (Somers, 1992). Also, they tend not to be stimulus screeners (Lay, 1987).
Non-screeners are more sensitive to pleasantness of tasks and thus more likely to be impulsive.
Qualitative analysis of procrastination also indicates that typically the decision to procrastinate is
impulsive and unplanned (Quarton, 1992). Finally, when asked how they prefer to structure their
daily work, procrastinators typically choose to start with the more pleasurable tasks, while nonprocrastinators prefer to sequence those last (König & Kleinmann, 2004).
Sensation seeking.
Evidence suggests that perhaps some procrastination is motivated by sensation seeking,
but not very much. As summarized, the average correlation with procrastination is .17 (K=11).
Additional findings in Kachgal et al.‟s (2000) and Solomon and Rothblum‟s (1984) factor
analyses suggest that sensation seeking has only marginal importance. These studies extracted a
risk-taking dimension by examining the reasons for procrastinating. It was not well endorsed,
with only 6.4% of students responding positively to its most popular item, “Looked forward to
the excitement of doing this task at the last minute.” Likewise, Froehlich (1987) found that one
of the lowest rated reasons for procrastinating was, “I like the excitement and challenge of doing
things at the last minute.”
However, there is one caveat. As mentioned, task aversiveness is strongly associated with
procrastination, particularly if the task is boring. Three of the studies on sensation seeking (Blunt
& Pychyl, 1998; Ferrari, 2000; Vodanovich & Rupp, 1999) deal specifically with boredom
proneness, which shows a significantly stronger relationship with procrastination according to
WLS regression (F(1,9)=20.4, p=.001), with a
r
=.40. 
The Nature of Procrastination 42
Conscientiousness
The results for conscientiousness and its facets are summarized in Table 5. Several early
studies have shown that there was some connection between procrastination and competitiveness
or super-ego strength (Effert & Ferrari, 1989; Wessman, 1973). More recent investigations using
conscientiousness from the five-factor model of personality indicate that the average correlation
is -.62 (K=20). Of note, Scher and Osterman (2002) found a virtually identical relationship when
using other- instead of self-reports.
In addition, once conscientiousness had been partialled out of the correlations between
procrastination and the other four trait factors, virtually none of them reached either practical or
statistical significance (Johnson & Bloom, 1995; Schouwenburg & Lay, 1995). Also,
Schouwenburg (1995) factor analyzed several measures related to procrastination,
conscientiousness, and neuroticism. The procrastination and conscientiousness variables loaded
together, while those related to neuroticism loaded on a separate dimension.
Self-control/self-discipline.
Researchers have studied self-discipline using a wide variety of self-control,
organization, and planning scales. Results, as reported in Table 5, indicate an average correlation
of -.58 (K=21). Other supporting research includes Schouwenburg‟s (1995) factor analysis,
which suggests that self-discipline may be equivalent to trait procrastination, or that it is at least
a proximal cause of procrastination behavior. Similarly, procrastinators tend to choose short-term
benefits over long-term gains, reflecting a core component of poor self-regulation (Tice &
Baumeister, 1997). 
The Nature of Procrastination 43
Distractibility.
Results firmly support the importance of distractibility. Its average correlation is large at
.45 (K=13) as well as extremely consistent, as indicated by the credibility intervals. Haycock
(1993) identified the availability of distractions as one of the top reasons contributing to
procrastination.
Organization.
As expected, organization demonstrates a strongly negative relationship. Results
consistently indicate that organization is antithetical to procrastination, with an average
correlation of -.36 (K=25).
Achievement motivation.
One of the first findings in the field of procrastination is that procrastinators tend to have
lower achievement drives (Lum, 1960). As meta-analytically summarized, need for achievement
combined with intrinsic motivation has an average correlation of -.35 (K=34). In addition, Lay‟s
(1987) efforts in typology extracted a type of procrastinator that he termed the “underachiever.”
However, achievement motivation is a broader construct than intrinsic motivation. Accordingly,
WLS regression confirms that results are significantly different depending upon whether they
deal with need for achievement or intrinsic motivation (F(1,34)=22.90, p<.001). Results dealing
specifically with need for achievement suggest an even higher correlation of -.46 (K=17).
Intention-action gap.
Procrastination does appear to be often involuntary, with procrastinators typically
agreeing with the statement, “No matter how much I try, I still put things off” (r=.64; Stainton,
1993). Other research supports this assertion. To begin with, several studies have compared
procrastination with self-reported work intentions over several time periods. The two variables 
The Nature of Procrastination 44
are almost completely independent, and thus procrastinators usually intend to work as hard as
anyone else or harder (
r =-.03, K=8). Given this typical lack of difference, researchers have
focused on how consistently procrastinators act upon these intentions. One way this has been
assessed is by administering procrastination measures in conjunction with a self-report intentionaction discrepancy measure, such as Kuhl‟s (1994) state-oriented hesitation scale or
Schouwenburg‟s (1992) dilatory behavior scale. As Table 5 indicates, dilatory behavior
correlates on average .52 with procrastination (K=16).
In addition, several researchers investigated this topic by measuring the disparity between
intended and actual work habits. As Table 5 indicates, the average correlation was .29 (K=6). Of
note, the size of this gap is highly contingent on the time separating intention and action. It
increases, the further ahead that procrastinators plan their actions (i.e., one week versus two)
(Steel, 2002a). On the other hand, the gap decreases and even reverses as the deadline begins to
loom (Steel et al., 2001; van Hooft et al., 2005). In the final hour, it is the procrastinator who is
doing more work than intended.
Outcomes
Outcomes refer to the expected effects on utility, specifically a poorer mood and worse
performance. It is important to note that these outcomes may still represent more distal causes of
procrastination, possibly increasing depression or decreasing self-efficacy, for example.
Effect on Mood
The empirical evidence concerning mood is not definitive. Moods have the potential to
show a relationship with procrastination where none may exist. Specifically, those in poorer
moods are more likely to indicate that they procrastinate, regardless of their actual behavior
(Carver & Scheier, 1990; Sarason et al., 1990; Stainton, Lay, & Flett, 2000; Steel et al., 2001). 
The Nature of Procrastination 45
More importantly, mood changes; procrastinators may feel remorse for their inactions at any
time, perhaps even after the experimental session or academic semester has ended.
Consequently, if we tested more frequently or possibly over longer time periods, a previously
undetected mood difference could easily appear. Since most of the studies have examined mood
over different sections of the timeline, the direction of the relationship is expected to be
inconsistent and meta-analytic aggregation does not appear to be advisable.
Supporting the importance of mood, Tice reports that procrastination could be motivated
by mood repair (Tice & Bratslavsky, 2000; Tice, Bratslavsky, & Baumeister, 2001). Students
who were experimentally manipulated into an unhappy mood were more likely to try lifting their
spirits before practicing for an informal math test. However, the long-term success of this
strategy seems doubtful, with Pychyl (1995) finding a correlation of .46 between project guilt
and project procrastination.
More support for the importance of mood comes from researchers who have used
repeated measures of state anxiety or mood over the duration of an academic course. Student
procrastinators tend to be more anxious across the entire semester (Rothblum, Solomon, &
Murakami, 1986),7
and tend to experience less stress early on, but more stress later on and more
stress overall (Tice & Baumeister, 1997). This last finding has been replicated in part, where the
relationship between procrastination and state agitation (i.e., anxiety) was observed, but only
either as an increase at the course end (Assur, 2003; Lay & Schouwenburg, 1993) or as a
decrease at the course beginning (Towers & Flett, 2004). Similarly, employee procrastinators
tend to continue worrying about their work after leaving the office (r=.31; Van Eerde, 1998).
Finally, Froelich (1987) and Haycock (1993) asked students retrospectively how they felt after
procrastinating, with over 80% of the responses categorized as negative. Similarly, an online poll 
The Nature of Procrastination 46
by the Procrastination Research Group (2005) based on over 9,000 respondents indicates that
94% find that procrastination has some negative effect on their happiness, with 18% indicating
that the effect is extremely negative.
Other researchers, however, indicate no significant relationship between mood and
procrastination. When the state anxiety of students was examined just before and then during
exams, no relationship was detected between it and procrastination (Lay, Edwards, Parker, &
Endler, 1989; Lay & Silverman, 1996). Also, student procrastinators did not become more
agitated or dejected after recollecting their study habits, indicating that their relative lack of work
was not particularly stressful to them (Lay, 1994). Similarly, a study using experience-sampling
methodology over a five-day period did not find any significant relationship between
procrastination and negative mood (Pychyl et al., 2000), despite a strong guilt relationship
(r=.42). Finally, countering Lay and Schouwenburg‟s (1993) results, Somers (1992) found no
significant association between mood and procrastination on the final day of class.
Poor Performance
The relationship between procrastination and performance is similar in strength though
opposite in direction as that seen for conscientiousness and performance. Results, as summarized
in Table 6, indicate a weak but consistently negative relationship between academic performance
and procrastination. The average correlation was -.19 (K=41). As the credibility interval
indicates, procrastination is usually harmful, sometimes harmless, but never helpful.
Other performance criteria confirm the dangers of procrastination. Consistently,
procrastination shows negative correlations with GPA, course GPA, final exam scores, and
assignment grades (see Table 6). Moving away from academic indicators, Sirois (2004) as well
as Elliot (2002) investigated the self-reported impact of procrastination on people‟s health, 
The Nature of Procrastination 47
finding significant negative correlations of -.16 and -.22, respectively. One major reason is that
procrastinators tend to postpone getting appropriate medical treatments and diagnostic tests (e.g.,
Colman, Brod, Potter, Buesching, & Rowland, 2004; Morris et al., 1990; White et al., 1994).
Elliot found an even stronger negative relationship, -.42, between procrastination and financial
well-being. Similarly, Mehabrian (2000) found a significant correlation of -.26 between
career/financial success and procrastination. Notably, evaluation of success was based on peerrather than self-report.
Demographics
The demographic analyses are based on aggregating individual level correlations but also
include an examination at a group level. Mean levels of procrastination were reported for 136
samples that used one of six primary scales (e.g., API, PASS); the analyses are confined to this
set, allowing the statistically control of measurement differences. When a study used multiple
procrastination scales, each mean was retained, although the sample was divided among each
result to prevent over weighting.
These procrastination measures were converted into a common five-point metric, dummy
coded, and then entered first into a WLS (weighted least squares) multiple regression analysis.
The subsequent step was to enter the variable of interest (e.g., age). Although individual-level
data tends to replicate at the group-level (Steel & Ones, 2002), this is not a necessary outcome
(Ostroff, 1993). Meta-analytic results are summarized in Table 6.
Age
Initial, uncorrected results are reported in Table 6, showing that indeed procrastination
appears to decrease with age (
r =-.15, K=16). However, these results suffer from extreme range
restriction. Correcting with a standard deviation based on those of age 12 and up (i.e., σ = 19.5 
The Nature of Procrastination 48
years) (US Census Bureau, 2000), the findings become extremely strong,
r =-.48. Those in their
senior years are putting off very little.
The effect of age on procrastination was also analyzed on a group level. The results,
however, were not significant, ( R
2
= .01, F(1,88) = .54, p = .47). This failure to replicate may
be because range restriction was still intense at the group level, where the average mean age was
21.8 and the standard deviation was 4.6.
Sex
Only a weak relationship was expected between sex and procrastination and the results
bear this out. After correcting for uneven splits, men do appear to procrastinate only slightly
more than women (
r =-.08, K=44). At a group level, there were 124 samples that reported the
percentage of men that comprise the sample, although the results were not significant at this level
of analysis ( R
2
= .01, F(1,125) = 1.86, p = .18).
Year
Publication year for the reported samples with mean data spans 23 years, from 1982 to
2005. Using publication year to indicate sample year, several analyses were conducted. After
controlling for the different procrastination measures, year of publication has a significant effect
for data up to 2003 ( R
2
= .06, F(1,123) = 7.81, p = .006; B =.027). However, including 2004
data diminished this effect ( R
2
= .03, F(1,132) = 4.39, p = .04), and by 2005 it no longer is
significant ( R
2
= .02, F(1,135) = 3.12, p = .08). There are several possible reasons for these
results, such as cohort effects. However, post hoc analysis indicates that they are due to
nationality. If we exclude the data from the USA, which comprises 65% of the results,
procrastination in the rest of world is increasing ( R
2
= .30, F(1,43) = 18.85, p < .001; B =.046).
Discussion
The Nature of Procrastination 49
Procrastination appears to reflect the human condition, since it is presently widespread
and has been reported for thousands of years. It is also particularly interesting in that voluntarily
delaying an intended course of action despite the expectation of being worse-off for the delay is
inherently risky or negative behaviour. Furthermore, procrastination is conceptually linked to
the conscientiousness trait, reflecting responsibility (i.e., “the diligent fulfilment of objectives”).
This makes procrastination especially important, because it can provide insight into the
relationship of traits to performance and motivation. As reviewed, there are theories suggesting a
relationship between procrastination and almost every construct, from perfectionism to
rebelliousness, and most of these theories have been tested. Efforts to understand procrastination
have been intensive, with hundreds of studies covering a wide range of situations and variables.
Thus, procrastination is ideal for establishing self-regulation‟s nomological web as well as for
testing Temporal Motivational Theory, both of which this paper attempts to address.
Regarding procrastination‟s nomological web, several strong findings have emerged.
Consistent with its conceptual foundation, procrastination does appear to be representative of
low conscientiousness and self-regulatory failure. Corrected for unreliability, its correlations
were approximately -.75, comparable and even occasionally superior to correlations among
conscientiousness measures themselves (Goldberg, 1990; Widiger & Trull, 1997). Importantly,
the corrected correlation with performance was very close to that obtained by conscientiousness,
around the mid .20‟s (Barrick, Mount, & Judge, 2001). This indicates that procrastination
largely, although not entirely, accounts for the relationship of conscientiousness to performance.
In addition, procrastination was strongly associated with a host of related concepts:
distractibility, organization, achievement motivation, and an intention-action gap. 
The Nature of Procrastination 50
Given this connection between procrastination and conscientiousness, it is not surprising
that procrastination shows weaker correlations with other traits. Agreeableness and sensation
seeking, for example, generated low correlations, below .20. However, of particular importance
are neuroticism and its facets of irrational beliefs and perfectionism. Repeatedly in the popular
press and counseling resources, irrational beliefs and perfectionism are taken to be major causes
of procrastination, as almost any self-help book or website on the topic will illustrate. This belief
has been exacerbated by publication bias, where published works tend to report higher
correlations for neuroticism and irrational beliefs than do unpublished works. Although there can
be a connection, procrastination does not appear to be anxiety related. The connection with
neuroticism appears to be due almost entirely to impulsiveness, which is sometimes nested under
that trait. Depression‟s connection appears mostly due to waning energy levels, which make
many tasks more aversive to pursue. Similarly, fear of failure appears to gain its relationship
through lack of self-confidence or low self-efficacy, which does have a strong dependable
connection. For perfectionism, the results are informative, indicating that procrastinators are
actually less likely, not more, to be perfectionists.8
However, several results have a conceptually and empirically unambiguous connection to
procrastination. Of particular note, procrastination is associated at a rho of ± .40 or greater with
individual difference variables of self-efficacy, need for achievement, proneness to boredom,
distractibility, impulsiveness, self-control, and organization. Furthermore, the confidence interval
widths (see Table 2 to 6) are narrow enough to confirm statistical significance, even after
controlling for family-wise error (i.e., p<.001). These findings provide good convergent validity
of Temporal Motivation Theory (TMT), as every outcome that it predicted was obtained (see
Table 1). We tend to procrastinate when the task is aversive or when rewards rather than 
The Nature of Procrastination 51
punishments are delayed. Similarly, procrastinators tend to act against their original intentions
(i.e., an intention-action gap) and tend to be younger rather than older. Finally, variables such as
agreeableness and neuroticism, which other theories indicated should be associated with
procrastination, were not significantly related, thus demonstrating discriminant validity. These
results were confirmed with a wide range of samples, measures, and methodologies.
Consequently, TMT does appear to be a good model for integrating the general findings
regarding self-regulation.
Implications of Temporal Motivation Theory (TMT)
Because conscientiousness and procrastination are closely linked, TMT provides an
excellent foothold towards furthering our knowledge of self-regulatory failure. As Judge and
Ilies (2002) conclude, we lack a theoretical framework explaining how personality traits are
related to motivation and affect performance. Similarly, as Zeidner et al. (2000) state, “A major
problem in exploring the self-regulation construct is mapping out the pattern of interrelationships
between self-regulation and related individual constructs, and the underlying processes to which
they relate” (p. 755). TMT indicates that there are four major variables to focus upon:
expectancy, value, sensitivity to delay, and delay itself. How these variables can improve selfregulation is reviewed, especially as they apply to procrastination.
Expectancy Related Interventions
One way of decreasing the procrastination concerning any task is to increase its
expectancy of success. The effect, as indicated in Figure 1, would be to shift its utility curve
upward. As the meta-analytic work here indicates, this is particularly true for self-efficacy.
Bandura (1997), who provides some of the most extensive work in this area, contends that
efficacy expectancy is somewhat susceptible to verbal persuasion and emotional arousal but is 
The Nature of Procrastination 52
especially influenced by modeling and actual performance accomplishments. By modeling,
Bandura refers to vicarious experiences where we observe other people completing the task
successfully. By performance accomplishments, he refers to completing the task successfully
oneself. Consequently, it may be necessary to acquire or to improve various skills relevant to
task completion in order to decrease procrastination later. For example, many people would
likely finish their taxes sooner if they were more confident about completing the task
successfully. Such confidence is bought largely with empirical confirmation. People must
demonstrate to themselves that they are capable of such success.
Value Related Interventions
The review here strongly indicates that task aversiveness, that is decreasing the value of a
task, increases procrastination. This is especially true if the task is considered boring or if it is
attempted when energy levels are low. Given that we are unlikely to like all tasks equally, we
expect some domain specificity with procrastination; there should be differential procrastination
depending on whether we examine activities associated with work, health, or socializing, for
example. Such domain specificity is not uncommon to motivational traits (e.g., VandeWalle,
Cron, & Slocum, 2001). To address task aversiveness, we have a variety of choices.
To begin with, we may choose to make tasks more difficult, although this runs counter to
the previous suggestions regarding expectancy. However, increasing task difficulty should
reduce boredom and, as the goal-setting literature indicates, can increase the self-satisfaction that
arises from completing the difficult rather than the easy (Wright, Hollenbeck, Wolf, &
McMahan, 1995). Consequently, tasks should be constructed to be challenging but still
achievable. Of note, those with higher needs for achievement may be receptive to this tradeoff
between expectancy and value, since they tend to take more pleasure in their accomplishments. 
The Nature of Procrastination 53
Second, Ainslie (1992) discusses how one might express a long-range interest by
indulging in a short-range impulse. By pairing the two together, our more distant goals can
“piggy-back” on more immediate concerns. For example, Ainslie writes about a miser who has a
wish to give to charity. Unfortunately, the miserliness is experienced more immediately and
supersedes the desire to be charitable. However, a stronger and even more immediate urge is to
gamble. Consequently, the miser‟s long-term interest in benevolent giving can find expression
through the occasional indulgence of a casino night at the local church. In this way, a task with
distal rewards may be paired with one that offers more immediate recompense. Murray (1938)
speaks of a similar phenomenon labeled fusing. Different needs may be satisfied through a single
action, permitting the desire for one outcome to be augmented by way of another. Other
examples of impulse pairing or fusing can include the creation of study groups by those who
enjoy socializing. Though the exam may be far off, the pleasant interaction with fellow students
can be experienced in the present. A more extreme instance of this strategy may be an entire
career change. Someone who is high in the need for cognition, that is, making sense and order of
the world, may find work more immediately satisfying and thus easier if he or she pursues an
academic rather than a business career.
Finally, one interesting way of changing the value of tasks is through classical
conditioning. Eisenberger (1992) discusses how effort towards a goal can be conditioned to take
on the reinforcing effects of the goal itself, an effect referred to as learned industriousness. This
follows directly from classical conditioning, where as long as effort leads to success at least
intermittently, effort will begin to be perceived as reinforcing in itself (i.e., a secondary
reinforcer). This conditioning need not be limited to effort. Stromer, McComas, and Rehfeldt
(2000) review the more general technique of stimulus chaining, where any aspect of work that 
The Nature of Procrastination 54
provides differential contingency for success can be a candidate. Whether the stimulus is
pictures, praise, or pennies, as long as it repeatedly predicts the reward, associations will build.
In this way, work can become intrinsically reinforcing; that is rewards are experienced during the
act, not afterwards. Since there is no delay in the reward, procrastination becomes much less
likely. Note that the ratio of successes to failures is of critical importance, especially in the early
stages of learning. Too much failure can bring about the opposite outcome of learned
helplessness, where effort would become increasing aversive (i.e., a conditioned punisher),
increasing the possibility of procrastination.
Sensitivity to Delay Interventions
Procrastinators tend to be impulsive, distractible, and lacking in self-control; thus, they
are very sensitive to delays. Ideally, we would like to influence these characteristics directly,
although as personality traits they are fairly stable. There has been some success with treating
impulse control disorders through psychopharmacology (e.g., Soutullo, McElroy, & Goldsmith,
1998), but this option is considered too severe to be appropriate for common self-regulatory
problems. However, we can more easily affect temptations, to which the impulsive individual is
especially vulnerable. Given procrastination‟s association with distractibility and organization,
two methods of reducing distractions can be immediately recommended: stimulus control and
automaticity.
First, stimulus control helps to direct behavior by indicating what is appropriate (i.e.,
rewarding) under any given circumstance. To prevent procrastination, we surround ourselves
with cues that confirm our goals and banish any sign that reminds us of temptation. Research
indicates that this approach is effective. For example, procrastination decreased for students who
studied in the same location (Ziesat, Rosenthal, & White, 1978), a finding which might confirm 
The Nature of Procrastination 55
the merit of offices. This result was largely replicated by Shoham-Salomon et al. (1989), as well
as by Mulry et al. (1994), although both used praise in conjunction with stimulus control.
In particular, Galué‟s (1990) and Coote-Weymann‟s (1988) workplace investigations
indicate that the most control over procrastination can be achieved by exploiting environmental
contributors. Consequently, we should be able to reduce procrastination by simply adjusting
situational aspects, specifically the proximity to temptation and the prevalence of stimulus cues.
A good example is email, with over 90% of college computer users reporting that they use it to
delay irrationally (Brackin, Ferguson, Skelly, & Chambliss, 2000). Since the email icon is
perpetually within the field of view and its access borders on instantaneous, simply making email
less visible or delaying access to it should decrease procrastination.
Second, Silver (1974) noted that one predictor of procrastination is the number of “choice
points” that a task requires. The more junctures that require choice, the more likely it is that we
will procrastinate. Consequently, fostering automaticity is a powerful self-control technique. It
refers to a habitualized course of action that can be conducted with little or no conscious
attention (Bargh & Barndollar, 1996; Karoly, 1993). These automatic routines can maintain goal
pursuit, as they limit decision making to that relevant to the task at hand. Because of these
confined parameters defined by the task, the decision to do otherwise is never made within a
heavily automatized routine. Several researchers speak to this effect. For Kuhl and Goschke
(1994), “The repeated use of strict time schedules…fosters the formation of behavioral habits
that circumvent conflicts with competing tendencies by establishing quasi-automatic trigger
conditions” (p. 107). Also, as Gollwitzer (1996) notes, “As long as the implementation of a
chosen goal does not follow habitualized routes, an individual will have to make further
decisions” (p. 292).
The Nature of Procrastination 56
Delay-Related Interventions
Almost by definition, delay is related to procrastination, and empirically there is strong
support. Two particularly relevant findings are that the intention-action gap increases the further
the two are temporally separated, and that those who are organized tend not to procrastinate.
These findings indicate that making proximal goals should increase motivation, which is entirely
consistent with goal setting theory, although the effect is often attributed to providing “additional
specific information” (Latham & Seijts, 1999, p. 422). This goal setting research can be
supplemented by studies that have been conducted specifically on procrastination.
A considerable amount of research has shown that goal setting does reduce
procrastination. Boice (1989) found that daily writing goals helped to keep academic writers on a
healthy schedule of publications. Also, in a self-paced course, Brooke and Ruthven (1984), as
well as Lamwers and Jazwinski (1989), used contracts for periodic work completion to decrease
procrastination. Similarly, Wesp (1986) used daily quizzes to diminish procrastination in a selfpaced course. Each set of quizzes was repeated until students achieved mastery of a section,
whereupon a new set was administered, thus providing a constant incremental goal to work
towards. Finally, Tuckman (1998) administered periodic quizzes in his class, finding that preidentified procrastinators tended to respond especially well to this intervention. Ariely and
Wetenbroch (2002) investigated goal setting (specifically, creating deadlines to prevent
procrastination), finding that they were effective, but more effective when set by other people.
Future Research
Extensive further research is needed that will fully explore procrastination and its
underpinnings. Although temporal discounting is evidently key to understanding procrastination,
and its use is widespread in the field of economics (see Loewenstein, 1992; Steel & König, in 
The Nature of Procrastination 57
press), the motivational literature has tended not to incorporate the notion (e.g., Franken, 1994;
Kanfer, 1990; Mitchell, 1997) and thus can offer only limited contributions. Consequently, there
is much interesting work to be done in the scientific fundamentals of description, prediction, and
control.
To begin with, although this review strongly indicates that TMT provides an excellent
description of procrastination, further confirmation would be desirable. The individual variables
composing TMT have been assessed, but there has yet to be a single comprehensive study
determining how well the variables work in conjunction. Such a study could include structural
equation modeling, which can help eliminate “third variable” explanations (see Lee et al., 2006).
However, a more advanced approach is also recommended. Steel and König (in press) suggest
that a computerized personal system of instruction (C-PSI) be used for further testing, as it can
provide “a wide-range of people who are striving at their own pace towards an important goal in
a standardized but realistic setting in which we can precisely but easily measure their behavior.”
Such a venue has already been employed for procrastination research (Moon & Illingworth,
2005; Steel et al., 2001) and can be specifically adapted to test TMT. We need to assess the
critical variables of expectancy, value, impulsiveness, and delay to determine how well they
predict observed procrastination using nonlinear regression with maximum likelihood estimation
(Jorgensen, 1983). Nonlinear regression is necessary because TMT is itself a nonlinear equation,
and maximum likelihood often helps to improve estimation involving a large number of people.
Furthermore, regarding description, several individual difference variables that were
thought to give rise to procrastination proved to have low or practically non-significant
correlations. However, clinical practice and self-reports do indicate that some may still remain as
contributors to procrastination. Likely, these variables represent one of several avenues by which 
The Nature of Procrastination 58
tasks are made aversive. For example, those who fear failure dread evaluative events that lack
the certainty of success, while those who are rebellious loathe externally imposed deadlines.
Whether these traits translate into chronic procrastination depends on their interaction with a host
of internal and external variables, including people‟s innate impulsiveness and need for
achievement, the availability of temptations, and the frequency of encountering the tasks that
they particularly dread. Future research, then, should not immediately dismiss these traits, but
rather determine if they are more distally related. For example, they may be important, but only
for a subset of the population and only when their lives are confined to specific situations.
Given that people‟s reasons for procrastination may be multifaceted, we need a
diagnostic procedure that identifies the most promising and pliable junctures in order to lay the
foundation for treatment. As theory indicates, there are a variety of reasons why people might
irrationally delay a task. As mentioned, they may be surrounded by easily available temptations.
They may be excessively impulsive. The task itself may be seen as excessively risky or aversive.
Each of these possibilities demands a very different response, and until we can fully assess
people‟s procrastination etiology, our efforts at helping must necessarily be haphazard.
Of particular relevance to diagnosis is a connection between brain functioning and
procrastination. In a recent review, Skolyes and Sagan (2002) note the following:
Something in our brains has to give the inner cues that start us doing things, keep us
going, and, if need be, change what we are doing. Usually that executive function belongs
to our prefrontal cortex. When it is injured, people tend to lose initiative. They may be
able to do things, but they don‟t get around to it. (p. 45)
So far the only investigation of the prefrontal cortex as a source of procrastination has been a
doctorate thesis by Stone (1999), who failed to find a significant effect. Still closer examination 
The Nature of Procrastination 59
is warranted, including examination of other promising brain areas. Of note, researchers studying
addiction, another area of irrational decision making, have identified a host of promising neural
systems that deal with the self-regulation of behavior (Robinson & Berridge, 2003). In particular,
the anterior cingulate has a pivotal role in preventing impulsive behavior and maintaining
attention to the task at hand.
Regarding control, our traditional treatments for procrastination should be more
extensive. Procrastination is usually work related, but industrial-organizational interventions are
limited primarily to goal setting and coping with stress (Karoly, 1993; Terry, Tonge, & Callan,
1995). A few alternatives have already been mentioned, but there are still many other methods of
regulation that are largely overlooked or whose efficacies are only beginning to be understood.
Particularly promising as a method of motivational control is altering one‟s attention towards a
temptation. As an early example, Ainslie (1992) notes that Freudian defense mechanisms (i.e.,
repression) provide much of their effectiveness by diverting “painful stimuli away from both
awareness and motor responsiveness into the unconscious” (p. 128). More recently, Mischel
(1996), alone and with others (Metcalfe & Mischel, 1999; Mischel, Shoda, & Rodriguez, 1989),
reviews this topic in depth, exploring a host of different attentional tactics that children can use
to delay gratification.
Finally, procrastination‟s intention-action gap is of particular importance. Although the
capacity of intentions for explaining behavior is debatable (e.g., Greve, 2001), they are still very
useful in predicting behavior. Intentions form the crux of action theories, particularly the Theory
of Planned Behavior (Ajzen, 1991). Meta-analytic summary of the Theory of Planned Behavior
shows that the intention-behavior correlation is on average .47 (Armitage & Conner, 2001),
which increases slightly to .52 with the assessment of Perceived Behavioral Control (i.e., an 
The Nature of Procrastination 60
expectancy related variable). However, although time is now recognized as moderator, its
mechanisms are not yet fully incorporated. For example, as Ajzen (1988) summarizes, “Since the
likelihood of unforeseen events will tend to increase as time passes, we would expect to find
stronger intention-behavior correlations with short rather than long periods of delay” (p. 116).
Although changes of circumstance can undoubtedly affect behavior, as TMT suggests, time itself
will affect motivational intensity and thus behavioral direction (see Figure 2). Furthermore, the
degree to which people are susceptible to an intention-action gap is largely influenced by the trait
of procrastination (van Hooft et al., 2005). Consequently, once trait procrastination is considered,
the ability of intentions to predict behavior could increase significantly.
Conclusion
References to procrastination can be found in some of the earliest records available,
stretching back at least 3000 years. Some of the first written words, agrarian guides, have
lamented it as a substantial problem. Mentions of procrastination have appeared in early Roman
and Greek military documents and in ancient religious texts. Looking ahead, procrastination does
not appear to be disappearing anytime soon. On the contrary, it and other problems due to
temporal discounting should continue to grow in frequency, particularly in the workplace.
Specifically, problems associated with procrastination and lack of self-control appear to
be increasing. At the same time, jobs are expected to become more unstructured or at least selfstructured (Cascio, 1995; Hunt, 1995). This absence of imposed direction means that the
competent worker must create the order – he or she must self-manage or self-regulate (Kanfer &
Heggestad, 1997). As structure continues to decrease, the opportunity for workers to
procrastinate will concomitantly increase. Furthermore, the prevalence and availability of
temptation, for example, in the forms of computer gaming or internet messaging, should continue 
The Nature of Procrastination 61
to exacerbate the problem of procrastination. There are simply more activities with desirable
features competing for our attention. Also, as mentioned previously, other forms of selfregulatory failure are becoming very widespread. Consumer behavior, for example, appears
particularly susceptible. An examination of credit card purchases revealed about five times as
much last-minute Christmas shopping done in 1999 as in 1991 (“Many Shoppers,” 1999), and
credit card debt is reaching unsustainable levels (Sivy, 2000).
In order to deal more effectively with the ubiquitous problem of procrastination, we need
to focus our efforts on the role of time in decision making. The theory reiterated here, Temporal
Motivation Theory, is a broad integrative formulation based on past work. It addresses a growing
need for integrative work that emphasizes the commonalities across different motivation
perspectives, letting us share our findings more effectively (Donovan, 2001; Locke & Latham,
2004). However, the motivation field could continue to benefit from a continued detailed
examination of temporal effects, such as Construal Level Theory (Trope & Liberman, 2003).
Procrastination has plagued human beings since at least the birth of civilization. If our research
perspectives fail to evolve, it may continue to define us for a considerable period of time. 
The Nature of Procrastination 62
References
Note: An asterisk denotes studies included in the meta-analysis.
Abramson, L. Y., Metalsky, G. I., & Alloy, L. B. (1989). Hopelessness depression: A theorybased subtype of depression. Psychological Review, 96, 358-372.
*Abry, D. A. (1999). A structural model of self-regulatory behavior and college student
achievement (Doctoral dissertation, Florida State University, 1990). Dissertation
Abstracts International, 59, 7-A.
Ackerman, D. S., & Gross, B. L. (2005). My instructor made me do it: Task characteristics of
procrastination. Journal of Marketing Education, 27, 5-13.
*Aguilar, J. V., & Valencia, A. C. (1995). Development of a structural model of procrastination.
Revista Mexicana de Psicologia, 12, 15-21.
Ainslie, G. (1975). Specious reward: A behavioral theory of impulsiveness and impulse control.
Psychological Bulletin, 82, 463-496.
Ainslie, G. (1992). Picoeconomics: The strategic interaction of successive motivational states
within the person. New York: Cambridge University Press.
*Aitken, M. E. (1982). A personality profile of the college student procrastinator (Doctoral
dissertation, University of Pittsburgh, 1982). Dissertation Abstracts International, 43,
722.
Ajzen, I. (1988). Attitudes, personality, and behaviour. Chicago, IL: Dorsey Press.
Ajzen, I. (1991). The theory of planned behavior. Organizational Behavior and Human Decision
Processes, 50, 179-211.
Akerlof, G. A. (1991). Procrastination and obedience. American Economic Review, 81(2), 1-19.
The Nature of Procrastination 63
*Aldarondo, F. (1993). A preliminary investigation of a two-motive theory of procrastination
(Master‟s dissertation, Mississippi State University, 1993). Masters Abstracts
International, 32, 1221.
American Psychiatric Association. (1994). Diagnostic and statistical manual of mental disorders
(4th ed.). Washington, DC: Author.
Anderson, C. J. (2003). The psychology of doing nothing: Forms of decision avoidance result from
reason and emotion. Psychological Bulletin, 129, 139-167.
*Anderson, E. M. (2001). The relationships among task characteristics, self-regulation and
procrastination. Unpublished doctoral dissertation, Loyola University of Chicago,
Illinois.
Ariely, D., & Wertenbroch, K. (2002). Procrastination, deadlines, and performance: Self-control
by precommitment. Psychological Science, 13, 219-224.
Armitage, C. J., & Connor, M. (2001). Efficacy of the theory of planned behavior: A metaanalytic review. British Journal of Social Psychology, 40, 471-499.
Arvey, R. D., Rotundo, M., Johnson, W., & McGue, M. (2003). The determinants of leadership:
The role of genetics and personality. Paper presented at the 18th Annual Conference of
the Society for Industrial and Organizational Psychology, Orlando, FL.
*Assur, A. M. (2003). The relationship of academic procrastination to affective and cognitive
components of subjective well-being. Unpublished doctoral dissertation, New School for
Social Research, New York.
Austin, J. T., & Klein, H. J. (1996). Work motivation and goal striving. In K. Murphy (Ed.),
Individual differences and behavior in organizations (pp. 209-257). San Francisco: JosseyBass. 
The Nature of Procrastination 64
Bandura, A. (1997). Self-efficacy: The exercise of control. New York: Freeman.
Bargh, J. A., & Barndollar, K. (1996). Automaticity in action: The unconscious as repository of
chronic goals and motives. In P. M. Gollwitzer & J. A. Bargh (Eds.), The psychology of
action: Linking cognition and motivation to behavior (pp. 457-481). New York: Guilford
Press.
Barrick, M. R., & Mount, M. K. (2003). Impact of meta-analysis methods on understanding
personality-performance relations. In K. R. Murphy (Ed.), Validity generalization: A
critical review (pp. 197-221). Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Barrick, M. R., Mount, M. K., & Judge, T. A. (2001) Personality and performance at the
beginning of the new millennium: What do we know and where do we go next?
International Journal of Selection and Assessment, 9, 9-30.
Baumeister, R. F., Heatherton, T. F., & Tice, D. M. (1994). Losing control: How and why people
fail at self-regulation. San Diego, CA: Academic Press.
Beck, A. T. (1993). Cognitive approaches to stress. In R. Woolfold & P. Lehrer (Eds.), Principles
and practice of stress management (2nd ed., pp. 333-372). New York: Guilford Press.
Beck, A. T., & Beck, R. W. (1972). Screening depressed patients in family practice: A rapid
technique. Postgraduate Medicine, 52, 81-85.
*Beck, B. L., Koons, S. R., & Milgrim, D. L. (2000). Correlates and consequences of behavioral
procrastination: The effects of academic procrastination, self-consciousness, self-esteem
and self-handicapping. Journal of Social Behavior and Personality, 15, 3-13.
Beier, M. E., & Ackerman, P. (2001). Current-events knowledge in adults: An investigation of age,
intelligence, and nonability determinants. Psychology and Aging, 16, 615-628.
Berzonsky, M. D. (1992). Identity style and coping strategies. Journal of Personality, 60, 771-788.
The Nature of Procrastination 65
*Berzonsky, M. D., & Ferrari, J. R. (1996). Identity orientation and decisional strategies.
Personality and Individual Differences, 20, 597-606.
*Beswick, G., & Mann, L. (1994). State orientation and procrastination. In J. Kuhl & J.
Beckmann (Eds.), Volition and personality: Action versus state orientation (pp. 391-396).
Gottingen, Germany: Hogrefe & Huber.
*Beswick, G., Rothblum, E. D., & Mann, L. (1988). Psychological antecedents of student
procrastination. Australian Psychologist, 23, 207-217.
Blatt, S. J., & Quinn, P. (1967). Punctual and procrastinating students: A study of temporal
parameters. Journal of Consulting Psychology, 31, 169-174.
*Blunt, A., & Pychyl, T. A. (1998). Volitional action and inaction in the lives of undergraduate
students: State orientation, procrastination and proneness to boredom. Personality and
Individual Differences, 24, 837-846.
*Blunt, A. K., & Pychyl, T. A. (2000). Task aversiveness and procrastination: A multidimensional approach to task aversiveness across stages of personal projects. Personality
and Individual Differences, 28, 153-167.
Bogg, T., & Roberts, B. W. (2004). Conscientiousness and health-related behaviors: A metaanalysis of the leading behavioral contributors to mortality. Psychological Bulletin, 130,
887-919.
Boice, R. (1989). Procrastination, busyness and bingeing. Behaviour Research and Therapy, 27,
605-611.
*Borsato, G. N. (2001). Time perspective, academic motivation, and procrastination (Master‟s
dissertation, San Jose State University, 2001). Masters Abstracts International, 40, 239.
The Nature of Procrastination 66
Brackin, T., Ferguson, E., Skelly, B., & Chambliss, C. (2000). College students' use of electronic
communication technology: Introverts versus extraverts. Unpublished manuscript,
Ursinus College, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania.
Brand, C. R. (1997). Hans Eysenck's personality dimensions: Their number and nature. In H.
Nyborg (Ed.), The scientific study of human nature: Tribute to Hans J. Eysenck at eighty
(pp. 17-35). Oxford, UK: Pergamon/Elsevier Science.
Brannick, M. T. (2001, April). Reducing bias in the Schmidt-Hunter meta-analysis. Poster
session presented at the annual conference of the Society for Industrial and
Organizational Psychology, San Diego, CA.
*Bridges, K. R., & Roig, M. (1997). Academic procrastination and irrational thinking: A reexamination with context controlled. Personality and Individual Differences, 22, 941-
944.
Briody, R. (1980). An exploratory study of procrastination (Doctoral dissertation, Brandeis
University, 1980). Dissertation Abstracts International, 41, 590.
Brooke, R. R., & Ruthven, A. J. (1984). The effects of contingency contracting on student
performance in a PSI class. Teaching of Psychology, 11(2), 87-89.
Brown, J. D., & Marshall, M. A. (2001). Great expectations: Optimism and pessimism in
achievement settings. In E. C. Chang (Ed.), Optimism and pessimism: Implications for
theory, research, and practice (pp. 239-255). Washington, DC: American Psychological
Association.
Brown, R. T. (1991). Helping students confront and deal with stress and procrastination. Journal
of College Student Psychotherapy, 6, 87-102.
The Nature of Procrastination 67
*Brownlow, S., & Reasinger, R. D. (2000). Putting off until tomorrow what is better done today:
Academic procrastination as a function of motivation toward college work. Journal of
Social Behavior and Personality, 15, 15-34.
*Buehler, R., & Griffin, D. (2003). Planning, personality, and prediction: The role of future
focus in optimistic time predictions. Organizational Behavior and Human Decision
Processes, 92, 80-90.
Burka, J. B., & Yuen, L. M. (1983). Procrastination: Why you do it, what to do about it.
Reading, MA: Addison-Wesley.
*Burns, L. R., Dittmann, K., Nguyen, N.-L., & Mitchelson, J. K. (2000). Academic
procrastination, perfectionism, and control: Associations with vigilant and avoidant
coping. Journal of Social Behavior and Personality, 15, 35-46.
*Busko, D. A. (1998). Causes and consequences of perfectionism and procrastination: A
structural equation model. Unpublished master‟s thesis, University of Guelph, Ontario,
Canada.
Campbell, D. T., & Fiske, D. W. (1959). Convergent and discriminant validation by the
multitrait-multimethod matrix. Psychological Bulletin, 56, 81-105.
Carver, C. S., & Scheier, M. F. (1990). Principles of self-regulation: Action and emotion. In E.
T. Higgins & R. M. Sorrentino (Eds.), Handbook of motivation and cognition:
Foundations of social behavior (Vol. 2, pp. 3-52). New York: Guilford Press.
Cascio, W.F. (1995). Whither industrial and organizational psychology in a changing world of
work? American Psychologist, 50, 928-939.
*Cassady, J. C., & Johnson, R. E. (2002). Cognitive test anxiety and academic performance.
Contemporary Educational Psychology, 27, 270-295.
The Nature of Procrastination 68
*Chissom, B., & Iran-Nejad, A. (1992). Development of an instrument to assess learning
strategies. Psychological Reports, 71, 1001-1002.
*Chu, A. H. C., & Choi, J. N. (2005). Rethinking procrastination: Positive effects of "active"
procrastination behavior on attitudes and performance. Journal of Social Psychology, 14,
245-264.
*Clark, J. L., & Hill, O. W. (1994). Academic procrastination among African-American college
students. Psychological Reports, 75, 931-936.
*Clehouse, R. E. (2000). Determining persistence indicators of students enrolled in for-profit
postsecondary institutions. Unpublished doctoral dissertation, Northern Illinois
University, Dekalb.
Colman, S. S., Brod, M., Potter, L.P, Buesching, D. P., & Rowland, C. R. (2004). Crosssectional 7-year follow-up of anxiety in primary care patients. Depression and Anxiety,
19, 105-111.
*Conti, R. (1996). Procrastination: a social psychological perspective (Doctoral dissertation,
Brandeis University, 1996). Dissertation Abstracts International, 57, 760.
*Coote-Weymann, E. (1988, August). Procrastination in the workplace: Dispositional and
situational determinants of delay behavior at work. Paper presented at the Academy of
Management Proceedings, Anaheim, CA.
Cornwell, J. M., & Ladd, R. T. (1993). Power and accuracy of the Schmidt and Hunter metaanalytic procedures. Educational and Psychological Measurement, 53, 877-895.
Costa, P. T., Jr., & McCrae, R. R. (1992). The NEO personality inventory-revised. Odessa, FL:
Psychological Assessment Resources. 
The Nature of Procrastination 69
Costa, P. T., Jr., McCrae, R. R, & Dye, D. A. (1991). Facet scales for agreeableness and
conscientiousness: A revision of the NEO Personality Inventory. Personality and
Individual Differences, 12, 887-898.
*Davis, J. K. (1999). The effects of culture on high school academic procrastination.
Unpublished doctoral dissertation, University of Southern California, Los Angeles.
*Davis, R. A. (2003). Problematic Internet use: Structure of the construct and association with
personality, stress, and coping. Unpublished doctoral dissertation, York University,
Toronto, Ontario, Canada.
*Davis, R. A., Flett, G. L., & Besser, A. (2002). Validation of a new scale for measuring
problematic Internet use: Implications for pre-employment screening. Cyberpsychology
and Behavior, 5, 331-345.
*Day, V., Mensink, D., & O'Sullivan, M. (2000). Patterns of academic procrastination. Journal
of College Reading and Learning, 30, 120-134.
*DeRoma, V. M., Young, A., Mabrouk, S. T., Brannan, K. P., Hilleke, R. O., & Johnson, K. Y.
(2003). Procrastination and student performance on immediate and delayed quizzes.
Education, 124, 40-48.
*Dewitte, S., & Lens, W. (2000a). Exploring volitional problems in academic procrastinators.
International Journal of Educational Research, 33, 733-750.
*Dewitte, S., & Lens, W. (2000b). Procrastinators lack a broad action perspective. European
Journal of Personality, 14, 121-140.
*Dewitte, S., & Schouwenburg, H. (2002). Procrastination, temptations, and incentives: The
struggle between the present and the future in procrastinators and the punctual. European
Journal of Personality, 16, 469-489.
The Nature of Procrastination 70
Digman, J. M. (1990). Personality structure: Emergence of the five-factor model. Annual Review
of Psychology, 41, 417-440.
*Donovan, J. M. (1995). Relating psychological measures to anthropological observations:
Procrastination as a field proxy for death anxiety? Journal of Social Behavior and
Personality, 10, 465-472.
Donovan, J. J. (2001). Work motivation. In N. Anderson, D. S. Ones, H. K. Sinangil, & C.
Viswesvaran (Eds.), Handbook of industrial and organizational psychology (Vol. 2, pp.
53-76). Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
Doty, D. H., & Glick, W. H. (1998). Common methods bias: Does common methods variance
really bias results? Organizational Research Methods, 1, 374-406.
*Dunn, G. (2000). Procrastination, stress, and coping: An investigation of the relationship
between procrastination and hardiness. Unpublished Honours BA thesis, Carleton
University, Ottawa, Ontario, Canada.
*Durden, C. A. (1997). Life satisfaction as related to procrastination and delay of gratification.
Unpublished master‟s thesis, Angelo State University, San Angelo, Texas.
*Effert, B. R., & Ferrari, J. R. (1989). Decisional procrastination: Examining personality
correlates. Journal of Social Behavior and Personality, 4, 151-161.
Eisenberger, R. (1992). Learned industriousness. Psychological Review, 99, 248-267.
*Elliot, R. (2002). A ten-year study of procrastination stability. Unpublished master‟s thesis,
University of Louisiana, Monroe, Louisiana.
Ellis, A. (1973). Humanistic psychotherapy. New York: McGraw-Hill.
The Nature of Procrastination 71
Ellis, A. (1989). Comments on my critics. In M. E. Bernard & R. DiGiuseppe (Eds.), Inside
rational-emotive therapy: A critical appraisal of the theory and therapy of Albert Ellis.
San Diego, CA: Academic Press.
Ellis, A., & Knaus, W. J. (1977). Overcoming procrastination. New York: Signet Books.
Else-Quest, N. M., Hyde, J. S., Goldsmith, H. H., & Van Hulle, C. A. (2006). Gender differences
in temperament: A meta-analysis. Psychological Bulletin, 132, 33-72.
*Elvers, G. C., Polzella, D. J., & Graetz, K. (2003). Procrastination in online courses:
Performance and attitudinal differences. Teaching of Psychology, 30, 159-162.
Enns, M. W., & Cox, B. J. (1995). The nature and assessment of perfectionism: A critical
analysis. In G. L. Flett & P. L. Hewitt (Eds.), Perfectionism: Theory, research, and
treatment (pp. 33-62). Washington, DC: American Psychological Association.
Eysenck, H. J., & Eysenck, S. B. G. (1964). Manual of the Eysenck Personality Inventory. San
Diego, CA: Educational and Industrial Testing Service.
Eysenck, H. J., & Eysenck, S. B. G. (1975). Manual of the Eysenck Personality Questionnaire.
London: Hodder & Stoughton.
Farnham, B. R. (1997). Roosevelt and the Munich crisis: A study of political decision-making.
Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
*Farran, B. (2004). Predictors of academic procrastination in college students. Unpublished
doctoral dissertation, Fordham University, New York.
*Fee, R. L., & Tangney, J. P. (2000). Procrastination: A means of avoiding shame or guilt?
Journal of Social Behavior and Personality, 15, 167-184.
Feingold, A. (1994). Gender differences in personality: A meta-analysis. Psychological Bulletin,
116, 429-526.
The Nature of Procrastination 72
*Ferrari, J. R. (1989a). Reliability of academic and dispositional measures of procrastination.
Psychological Reports, 64, 1057-1058.
*Ferrari, J. R. (1989b). Self-handicapping by procrastinators: Effects of performance privacy and
task importance (Doctoral dissertation, Adelphi University, 1989). Dissertation Abstracts
International, 50, 5377.
*Ferrari, J. R. (1991a). Compulsive procrastination: Some self-reported characteristics.
Psychological Reports, 68, 455-458.
*Ferrari, J. R. (1991b). Procrastination and project creation: Choosing easy, nondiagnostic items
to avoid self-relevant information. Journal of Social Behavior and Personality, 6, 619-
628.
*Ferrari, J. R. (1991c). Self-handicapping by procrastinators: Protecting self-esteem, socialesteem, or both? Journal of Research in Personality, 25, 245-261.
*Ferrari, J. R. (1992a). Procrastinators and perfect behavior: An exploratory factor analysis of
self-presentation, self-awareness, and self-handicapping components. Journal of
Research in Personality, 26, 75-84.
*Ferrari, J. R. (1992b). Psychometric validation of two procrastination inventories for adults:
Arousal and avoidance measures. Journal of Psychopathology and Behavioral
Assessment, 14, 97-110.
Ferrari, J. R. (1993a). Christmas and procrastination: Explaining lack of diligence at a “realworld” task deadline. Personality and Individual Differences, 14, 25-33.
*Ferrari, J. R. (1993b). Procrastination and impulsiveness: Two sides of a coin? In W. G.
McCown, J. L. Johnson, & M. B. Shure (Eds.), The impulsive client: Theory, research,
and treatment (pp. 265-276). Washington, DC: American Psychological Association.
The Nature of Procrastination 73
*Ferrari, J. R. (1994). Dysfunctional procrastination and its relationship with self-esteem,
interpersonal dependency, and self-defeating behaviors. Personality and Individual
Differences, 17, 673-679.
*Ferrari, J. R. (1995). Perfectionism cognitions with nonclinical and clinical samples. Journal of
Social Behavior and Personality, 10, 143-156.
*Ferrari, J. R. (2000). Procrastination and attention: Factor analysis of attention deficit,
boredomness, intelligence, self-esteem, and task delay frequencies. Journal of Social
Behavior and Personality, 15, 185-196.
*Ferrari, J. R. (2001). Procrastination as self-regulation failure of performance: Effects of
cognitive load, self-awareness, and time limits on 'working best under pressure.‟
European Journal of Personality, 15, 391-406.
*Ferrari, J., & Beck, B. (1998). Affective responses before and after fraudulent excuses by
academic procrastinators. Education, 118, 529-537.
*Ferrari, J. R., & Dovidio, J. F. (2000). Examining behavioral processes in indecision:
Decisional procrastination and decision-making style. Journal of Research in
Personality, 34, 127-137.
*Ferrari, J. R., & Dovidio, J. F. (2001). Behavioral information search by indecisives.
Personality and Individual Differences, 30, 1113-1123.
*Ferrari, J. R., & Emmons, R. A. (1994). Procrastination as revenge: Do people report using
delays as a strategy for vengeance? Personality and Individual Differences, 17, 539-544.
*Ferrari, J. R., & Emmons, R. A. (1995). Methods of procrastination and their relation to selfcontrol and self-reinforcement: An exploratory study. Journal of Social Behavior and
Personality, 10, 135-142.
The Nature of Procrastination 74
*Ferrari, J. R., Harriott, J. S., Evans, L., Lecik-Michna, D. M., & Wenger, J. M. (1997).
Exploring the time preferences of procrastinators: Night or day, which is the one?
European Journal of Personality, 11, 187-196.
Ferrari, J. R., Johnson, J. L., & McCown, W. G. (1995). Procrastination and task avoidance:
Theory, research, and treatment. New York: Plenum Press.
*Ferrari, J. R., Keane, S. M., Wolfe, R. N., & Beck, B. L. (1998). The antecedents and
consequences of academic excuse-making: Examining individual differences in
procrastination. Research in Higher Education, 39, 199-215.
*Ferrari, J. R., & McCown, W. (1994). Procrastination tendencies among obsessive-compulsives
and their relatives. Journal of Clinical Psychology, 50, 162-167.
*Ferrari, J. R., & Olivette, M. J. (1994). Parental authority and the development of female
dysfunctional procrastination. Journal of Research in Personality, 28, 87-100.
*Ferrari, J. R., Parker, J. T., & Ware, C. B. (1992). Academic procrastination: Personality
correlates with Myers-Briggs types, self-efficacy, and academic locus of control. Journal
of Social Behavior & Personality, 7, 495-502.
*Ferrari, J. R., & Patel, T. (2004). Social comparisons by procrastinators: Rating peers with
similar or dissimilar delay tendencies. Personality and Individual Differences, 37, 1493-
1501.
*Ferrari, J. R., Parker, J. T., & Ware, C. B. (1992). Academic procrastination: Personality
correlates with Myers-Briggs types, self-efficacy, and academic locus of control. Journal
of Social Behavior and Personality, 7, 495-502.
The Nature of Procrastination 75
*Ferrari, J. R., & Scher, S. J. (2000). Toward an understanding of academic and nonacademic
tasks procrastinated by students: The use of daily logs. Psychology in the Schools, 37,
359-366.
*Ferrari, J. R., & Tice, D. M. (2000). Procrastination as a self-handicap for men and women: A
task-avoidance strategy in a laboratory setting. Journal of Research in Personality, 34,
73-83.
*Ferrari, J. R., Wolfe, R. N., Wesley, J. C., Schoff, L. A., & Beck, B., L. (1995). Ego-identity
and academic procrastination among university students. Journal of College Student
Development, 36, 361-367.
*Flett, G. L., Blankstein, K. R., Hewitt, P. L., & Koledin, S. (1992). Components of
perfectionism and procrastination in college students. Social Behavior and Personality,
20, 85-94.
*Flett, G. L., Blankstein, K. R., & Martin, T. R. (1995). Procrastination, negative self-evaluation,
and stress in depression and anxiety: A review and preliminary model. In J. R. Ferrari &
J. L. Johnson (Eds.), Procrastination and task avoidance: Theory, research, and
treatment. The Plenum series in social/clinical psychology (pp. 137-167). New York:
Plenum Press.
Franken, R. E. (1994) Human motivation (3rd ed.). Pacific Grove, CA: Brooks/Cole.
Freud, S. (1961). The ego and the id. In J. Strachey (Ed. and trans.), The standard edition of the
complete psychological works of Sigmund Freud (Vol. 19, pp. 12-66). London: Hogarth
Press. (Original work published 1923) 
The Nature of Procrastination 76
*Fritzsche, B. A., Young, B. R., & Hickson, K. C. (2003). Individual differences in academic
procrastination tendency and writing success. Personality and Individual Differences, 35,
1549-1557.
Froehlich, R. A. (1987). A descriptive study of general procrastination in a group-oriented
treatment setting (Doctoral dissertation, United States International University, 1987).
Dissertation Abstracts International, 48, 1151.
*Frost, R. O., Marten, P., Lahart, C., & Rosenblate, R. (1990). The dimensions of perfectionism.
Cognitive Therapy and Research, 14, 449-468.
*Garden, R., Bryant, C., & Moss, R. (2004). Locus of control, test anxiety, academic
procrastination, and achievement among college students. Psychological Reports, 95,
581-582.
Galué, A. J. (1990). Perceived job ambiguity, predisposition to procrastinate, work-related
information and experience: An investigation of procrastination behavior at work.
Unpublished doctoral dissertation, Tulane University, New Orleans, LA.
*Gauthier, L., Senécal, C., & Guay, F. (2002). Academic procrastination in graduate students:
The role of the student and of the research director. European Review of Applied
Psychology/Revue Europeenne de Psychologie Appliquee, 52, 25-40.
Gersick, C. J. G. (1989). Marking time: Predictable transitions in task groups. Academy of
Management Journal, 33, 274-309.
Gandhi, M. K., Strohmeier, J., & Nagler, M. N. (2000). The Bhagavad Gita according to
Gandhi. Berkeley, CA: Berkeley Hills Books.
Goldberg, L. R. (1990). An alternative "description of personality": The big-five factor structure.
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 59, 1216-1229.
The Nature of Procrastination 77
Goldberg, L. R. (1993). The structure of phenotypic personality traits. American Psychologist,
48, 26-34.
Gollwitzer, P. M. (1996). The volitional benefits from planning. In P. M. Gollwitzer & J. A.
Bargh (Eds.), The psychology of action: Linking cognition and motivation to behavior
(pp. 287-312). New York: Guilford Press.
*Greatrix, J. (1999). Subjective vs objective measures of stress: Do procrastinators actually
benefit. Unpublished Honours BS thesis, Carleton University, Ottawa, Ontario.
*Grecco, P. R. (1984). A cognitive-behavioral assessment of problematic academic
procrastination: development of a procrastination self- statement inventory (Doctoral
dissertation, California School of Professional Psychology - Fresno, 1984). Dissertation
Abstracts International, 46, 640.
Green, L., Fry, A. F., & Myerson J. (1994). Discounting of delayed rewards: A life-span
comparison. Psychological Science, 5, 33-36.
Greve, W. (2001). Traps and gaps in action explanation: Theoretical problems of a psychology
of human action. Psychological Review, 108, 435-451.
Griffiths, M. D., & Parke, J. (2002). The social impact of Internet gambling. Social Science
Computer Review, 20, 312-320.
Guilford, J. P. (1977). Will the real factor of extraversion-introversion please stand up? A reply
to Eysenck. Psychological Bulletin, 84, 412-416.
*Guilfoyle, E. C. (1986). The effects of psychological reactance and paradoxical and selfdirective forms of brief psychotherapy on procrastination (Doctoral dissertation, Texas A
& M University, 1986). Dissertation Abstracts International, 47, 4327.
The Nature of Procrastination 78
Hall, S. M., & Brannick, M. T. (2002). Comparison of two random-effects methods of metaanalysis. Journal of Applied Psychology, 87, 377-389.
*Han, S. (1993). A multivariate study of procrastination: cognitive, affective, and behavioral
factors in prediction (Doctoral dissertation, State University of New York at Albany,
1993). Dissertation Abstracts International, 54, 2512.
Harary, K., & Donahue, E. (1994). Who do you think you are? Explore your many-sided self with
Berkeley Personality Profile. San Francisco: Harper.
*Harrington, N. (2005). It's too difficult! Frustration intolerance beliefs and procrastination.
Personality and Individual Differences, 39, 873-883.
*Harriott, J., & Ferrari, J. R. (1996). Prevalence of procrastination among samples of adults.
Psychological Reports, 78, 611-616.
*Harriott, J. S., Ferrari, J. R., & Dovidio, J. F. (1996). Distractability, daydreaming, and selfcritical cognitions as determinants of indecision. Journal of Social Behavior and
Personality, 11, 337-344.
*Harriott, K. (1999). A correlational pilot study examining affect and procrastination on the
Internet. Unpublished manuscript, Carleton University, Ottawa, Ontario, Canada.
Harris, N. N., & Sutton, R. I. (1983). Task procrastination in organizations: A framework for
research. Human Relations, 36, 987-995.
*Havel, A. (1993). Differential effectiveness of selected treatment approaches to procrastination.
Unpublished doctoral dissertation, McGill University, Montreal, Quebec, Canada.
Haven‟t filed yet? Tackle those taxes. (2003, April 11). USA Today, p. 3B.
The Nature of Procrastination 79
*Haycock, L. A. (1993). The cognitive mediation of procrastination: An investigation of the
relationship between procrastination and self-efficacy beliefs (Doctoral dissertation,
University of Minnesota, 1993). Dissertation Abstracts International, 54, 2261.
*Haycock, L. A., McCarthy, P., & Skay, C. L. (1998). Procrastination in college students: The
role of self-efficacy and anxiety. Journal of Counseling and Development, 76, 317-324.
*Heavenor, A. L. (2001). The influence of procrastination on implementation intentions and goal
pursuits. Unpublished master‟s thesis, Carleton University, Ottawa, Ontario, Canada.
*Helmke, A., & Schrader, F. W. (2000). Procrastination im Studium - Erscheinungsformen und
motivationale Bedingungen [Procrastination in higher education: Types and motivational
conditions]. In U. Schiefele & K.-P. Wild (Eds.), Interesse und Lernmotivation:
Untersuchungen zu Entwicklung, Förderung und Wirkung (pp. 207-225). Münster,
Germany: Waxmann.
*Hess, B., Sherman, M. F., & Goodman, M. (2000). Eveningness predicts academic
procrastination: The mediating role of neuroticism. Journal of Social Behavior and
Personality, 15(5), 61-74.
Hickman, E. (1998). The works of Jonathan Edwards (Vols. 1-2). Bath, United Kingdom: Bath
Press.
Hogan, J., & Ones, D. S. (1997). Conscientiousness and integrity at work. In R. Hogan, J.
Johnson, & S. Briggs (Eds.), Handbook of personality psychology (pp. 849-870). New
York: Academic Press.
Holland, T. (2001). The perils of procrastination. Far Eastern Economic Review, 164, 66-72.
The Nature of Procrastination 80
*Holmes, R. A. (2000). The effect of task structure and task order on subjective distress and
dilatory behavior in academic procrastinators. Unpublished doctoral dissertation,
Hofstra University, Hempstead, New York.
*Huang, J. C.-H. (1999). The attributional processes and emotional consequences of
procrastination (Doctoral dissertation, California School of Professional Psychology,
1999). Dissertation Abstracts International, 60, 367.
Huffcutt, A. I., & Arthur, W., Jr. (1995). Development of a new outlier statistic for meta-analytic
data. Journal of Applied Psychology, 80, 327-334.
Hunt, E. B. (1995). Will we be smart enough? A cognitive analysis of the coming workforce.
New York: Russell Sage Foundation.
Hunter, J. E., & Schmidt, F. L. (1990). Methods of meta-analysis: Correcting for error and bias
in research findings across studies. Beverly Hills, CA: Sage.
Hurtz, G. M., & Donovan, J. J. (2000). Personality and job performance: The Big Five revisited.
Journal of Applied Psychology, 85, 869-879.
Ishiyama, F. I., & Munson, P. A. (1993). Development and validation of a self-critical cognition
scale. Psychological Reports, 72, 147-154.
*Jackson, T., Fritch, A., Nagasaka, T., & Pope, L. (2003). Procrastination and perceptions of
past, present, and future. Individual Differences Research, 1, 17-28.]
*Jackson, T., Weiss, K. E., & Lundquist, J. J. (2000). Does procrastination mediate the
relationship between optimism and subsequent stress? Journal of Social Behavior and
Personality, 15, 203-212.
James, W. (1890). Principles of psychology (Vols. 1, 2). New York: Holt.
The Nature of Procrastination 81
John, O. P., Donahue, E. M., & Kentle, R. L. (1991). The Big Five Inventory – Versions 4a and
54. Berkeley: University of California, Berkeley, Institute of Personality and Social
Research.
John, O. P., & Sanjay, S. (1999). The big five trait taxonomy: History, measurement, and
theoretical perspectives. In L. A. Pervin & O. P. John (Eds.), Handbook of personality
(pp. 102-138). New York: Guilford Press.
*Johnson, J. L., & Bloom, A. M. (1995). An analysis of the contribution of the five factors of
personality to variance in academic procrastination. Personality and Individual
Differences, 18, 127-133.
*Johnson, J., & McCown, W. (1989, May). Validation of an adult inventory of procrastination.
Paper presented at the annual meeting of the Midwestern Psychological Association,
Chicago, IL.
Johnson, S. (1751, June 29). Procrastination. Rambler # 134. Retrieved March 16, 2006, from
http://www.samueljohnson.com/procrast.html#1185
*Jones, C. H., Slate, J. R., Bell, S., & Saddler, C. D. (1991). Helping high school students
improve their academic skills: A necessary role for teachers. High School Journal, 74,
198-202.
Jones, E. E., & Berglas, S. (1978). Control of attributions about the self through selfhandicapping strategies: The appeal of alcohol and the role of underachievement.
Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 4, 200-206.
Jorgensen, B. (1983). Maximum likelihood estimation and large-sample inference for
generalized linear and nonlinear regression models. Biometrika, 70, 19-28. 
The Nature of Procrastination 82
Judge, T. A., & Bono, J. E. (2001). Relationship of core self-evaluations traits – self-esteem,
generalized self-efficacy, locus of control, and emotional stability – with job satisfaction
and job performance: A meta-analysis. Journal of Applied Psychology, 86, 80-92.
Judge, T. A., & Ilies, R. (2002). Relationship of personality to performance motivation: A metaanalytic review. Journal of Applied Psychology, 87, 797-807.
*Kachgal, M. M., Hansen, L. S., & Nutter, K. J. (2001). Academic procrastination
prevention/intervention: Strategies and recommendations. Journal of Developmental
Education, 25, 14-24.
*Kalechstein, P., Hocevar, D., Zimmer, J. W., & Kalechstein, M. (1989). Procrastination over
test preparation and test anxiety. In R. Schwarzer, H. M. van der Ploeg, & G. D.
Spielberger (Eds.), Advances in test anxiety research (Vol. 6, pp. 63-76). Lisse, The
Netherlands: Swets & Zeitlinger.
Kanfer, R. (1990). Motivation theory. In M. Dunnette & L. Houghs (Eds.), Handbook of
industrial and organizational psychology (2nd ed., Vol. 1, pp.124-151). Palo Alto, CA:
Consulting Psychologists Press.
Kanfer, R., & Heggestad, E. D. (1997). Motivational traits and skills: A person-centered
approach to work motivation. Research in Organizational Behavior, 19, 1-56.
Kaplan, J. C. (1998). Molecular basis of procrastination: Cloning of a gene for help in decision
making. Médecine Sciences, 14, 525-528.
Karoly, P. (1993). Mechanisms of self-regulation: A systems view. Annual Review of
Psychology, 44, 23-52.
The Nature of Procrastination 83
Kasper, G. (2004, March). Tax procrastination: Survey finds 29% have yet to begin taxes.
Retrieved March 14, 2006, from
http://www.prweb.com/releases/2004/3/prweb114250.htm
Kegley, C. W. (1989). The Bush administration and the future of American foreign policy:
Pragmatism, or procrastination? Presidential Studies Quarterly, 19, 717-731.
*Klibert, J. J. (2004). Self-oriented and socially prescribed perfectionism: Are they differentiated
by adaptive and maladaptive psychological symptoms? Unpublished master‟s thesis,
University of South Alabama, Mobile.
Klinger, E. (1996). The contents of thoughts: Interference as the downside of adaptive normal
mechanisms in thought flow. In I. G. Sarason, G. R. Pierce, & B. R. Sarason (Eds.),
Cognitive interference: Theories, methods, and findings (pp. 3-23). Mahwah, NJ:
Lawrence Erlbaum.
Klinger, E. (1999). Thought flow: Properties and mechanisms underlying shifts in content. In J.
A. Singer & P. Salovey (Eds.), At play in the fields of consciousness: Essays in honor of
Jerome L. Singer (pp. 29-50). Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum.
Knaus, W. J. (1973). Overcoming procrastination. Rational Living, 8(2), 2-7.
Knaus, W. J. (1979). Do it now. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall.
König, C. J., & Kleinmann, M. (2004). Business before pleasure: No strategy for procrastinators?
Personality and Individual Differences, 37(5), 1045-1057.
Kuhl, J. (1994). A theory of action and state orientations. In J. Kuhl & J. Beckmann (Eds.),
Volition and personality: Action versus state orientation (pp. 9-46). Göttingen, Germany:
Hogrefe & Huber.
The Nature of Procrastination 84
Kuhl, J. (2000). A functional-design approach to motivation and self-regulation: The dynamics
of personality systems interactions. In M. Boekaerts, P. R. Pintrich, & M. Zeidner (Eds.),
Handbook of self-regulation (pp. 111-169). San Diego, CA: Academic Press.
Kuhl, J., & Goschke, T. (1994). A theory of action control: Mental subsystems, modes of
control, and volitional conflict-resolution strategies. In J. Kuhl & J. Beckmann (Eds.),
Volition and personality: Action versus state orientation (pp. 93-124). Göttingen,
Germany: Hogrefe & Huber.
*Lamba, G. (1999). Effect of gender-role and self-efficacy on academic procrastination in
college students. (Master‟s dissertation, Truman State University, 1999). Masters
Abstracts International, 38, 481.
Lamwers, L. L., & Jazwinski, C. H. (1989). A comparison of three strategies to reduce student
procrastination in PSI. Teaching of Psychology, 16, 8-12.
Lasane, T. P., & Jones, J. M. (2000). When socially induced temporal myopia interferes with
academic goal-setting. Journal of Social Behavior and Personality, 15, 75-86.
Latham, G. P., & Seijts, G. H. (1999). The effects of proximal and distal goals on performance
on a moderately complex task. Journal of Organizational Behavior, 20, 421-429.
*Lavoie, J. A. A., & Pychyl, T. A. (2001). Cyberslacking and the procrastination superhighway:
A web-based survey of online procrastination, attitudes, and emotion. Social Science
Computer Review, 19, 431-444.
*Lay, C. H. (1986). At last, my research article on procrastination. Journal of Research in
Personality, 20, 474-495.
*Lay, C. H. (1987). A modal profile analysis of procrastinators: A search for types. Personality
and Individual Differences, 8, 705-714.
The Nature of Procrastination 85
*Lay, C. H. (1988). The relationship of procrastination and optimism to judgments of time to
complete an essay and anticipation of setbacks. Journal of Social Behavior and
Personality, 3, 201-214.
Lay, C. H. (1990). Working to schedule on personal projects: An assessment of person-project
characteristics and trait procrastination. Journal of Social Behavior and Personality, 5,
91-103.
*Lay, C. H. (1992). Trait procrastination and the perception of person-task characteristics.
Journal of Social Behavior and Personality, 7, 483-494.
*Lay, C. H. (1994). Trait procrastination and affective experiences: Describing past study
behavior and its relation to agitation and dejection. Motivation and Emotion, 18, 269-284.
*Lay, C. H. (1997). Explaining lower-order traits through higher-order factors: The case of trait
procrastination, conscientiousness, and the specificity dilemma. European Journal of
Personality, 11, 267-278.
*Lay, C. H., & Brokenshire, R. (1997). Conscientiousness, procrastination, and person-task
characteristics in job searching by unemployed adults. Current Psychology:
Developmental, Learning, Personality, Social, 16, 83-96.
Lay, C. H., & Burns, P. (1991). Intentions and behavior in studying for an examination: The role
of trait procrastination and its interaction with optimism. Journal of Social Behavior and
Personality, 6, 605-617.
Lay, C. H., Edwards, J. M., Parker, J. D., & Endler, N. S. (1989). An assessment of appraisal,
anxiety, coping, and procrastination during an examination period. European Journal of
Personality, 3, 195-208.
The Nature of Procrastination 86
*Lay, C. H., Knish, S., & Zanatta, R. (1992). Self-handicappers and procrastinators: A
comparison of their practice behavior prior to an evaluation. Journal of Research in
Personality, 26, 242-257.
*Lay, C. H., Kovacs, A., & Danto, D. (1998). The relation of trait procrastination to the big-five
factor conscientiousness: An assessment with primary-junior school children based on
self-report scales. Personality and Individual Differences, 25, 187-193.
*Lay, C. H., & Schouwenburg, H. C. (1993). Trait procrastination, time management, and
academic behavior. Journal of Social Behavior and Personality, 8, 647-662.
*Lay, C. H., & Silverman, S. (1996). Trait procrastination, anxiety, and dilatory behavior.
Personality and Individual Differences, 21, 61-67.
*Lee, D.-G. (2003). A cluster analysis of procrastination and coping (Korea). Unpublished
doctoral thesis, University of Missouri, Columbia.
*Lee, J. (2000). A comparison of the personal constructs of students scoring high, medium and
low on a measure of academic procrastination. Unpublished master‟s thesis, Carleton
University, Ottawa, Ontario, Canada.
*Lee, E. (2005). The relationship of motivation and flow experience to academic procrastination
in university students. Journal of Genetic Psychology, 166, 5-14.
*Lee, D. G., Kelly, K. R., & Edwards, J. K. (2006). A closer look at the relationships among trait
procrastination, neuroticism, and conscientiousness. Personality and Individual
Differences, 40, 27-37.
Lewin, K. (1935). A dynamic theory of personality. New York: McGraw Hill.
Lindsley, D. H., Brass, D. J., & Thomas, J. B. (1995). Efficacy-performance spirals: A multilevel
perspective. The Academy of Management Review, 20, 645-678.
The Nature of Procrastination 87
Locke, E. A., & Latham, G. P. (1990). A theory of goal setting and task performance.
Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice Hall.
Locke, E. A., & Latham, G. P. (2004). What should we do about motivation theory? Six
recommendations for the twenty-first century. Academy of Management Review, 29, 388-
403.
*Loebenstein, A. M. (1996). The effects of subgoal setting and academic self-efficacy on
procrastination (self-efficacy). (Doctoral dissertation, California School of Professional
Psychology, San Diego, 1996). Dissertation Abstracts International, 57, 1446.
*Loers, D. L. (1985). Responsiveness to paradoxical intervention: Client characteristics.
(Doctoral dissertation, University of Nebraska, Lincoln, 1985). Dissertation Abstracts
International, 46, 2814-2815.
Loewenstein, G. (1992). The fall and rise of psychological explanations in the economics of
intertemporal choice. In G. Loewenstein & J. Elster (Eds.), Choice over time (pp. 3-34).
New York: Russell Sage Foundation.
Loewenstein, G., & Elster, J. (Eds.). (1992). Choice over time. New York: Russell Sage
Foundation.
Loewenstein, G., & Prelec, D. (1992). Anomalies in intertemporal choice: Evidence and an
interpretation. In G. Loewenstein & J. Elster (Eds.), Choice over time (pp. 119-145). New
York: Russell Sage Foundation.
*Lonergan, J. M., & Maher, K. J. (2000). The relationship between job characteristics and
workplace procrastination as moderated by locus of control. Journal of Social Behavior
and Personality, 15, 213-224.
The Nature of Procrastination 88
*Lopez, F., & Wambach, C. (1982). Effects of paradoxical and self-control directives in
counseling. Journal of Counseling Psychology, 29, 115-124.
Lum, M. K. M. (1960). A comparison of under- and overachieving female college students.
Journal of Educational Psychology, 51, 109-115.
Lyly, J. (1579/1995). Gales’ quotations [Computer Software]. Princeton Junction, NJ: Cognetics
Corp.
Madden, G. J., Petry, N. M., Badger, G. J., & Bickel, W. K. (1997). Impulsive and self-control
choices in opioid-dependent patients and non-drug-using control patients: Drug and
monetary rewards. Experimental and Clinical Psychopharmacology, 5, 256-262.
*Mallows, C. (1999). Existential aspects of procrastination. Unpublished Honours BA thesis,
Carleton University, Ottawa, Ontario, Canada.
*Mann, L., Burnett, P., Radford, M., & Ford, S. (1997). The Melbourne Decision Making
Questionnaire: An instrument for measuring patterns for coping with decisional conflict.
Journal of Behavioral Decision Making, 10, 1-19.
*Mann, L., Radford, M., Burnett, P., Ford, S., Bond, M., Leung, K., et al. (1998). Cross-cultural
differences in self-reported decision-making style and confidence. International Journal
of Psychology, 33, 325-335.
Many shoppers won‟t do today what they can do on Dec. 24. (1999, November 24). The New
York Times, p. 12.
*Mariano, C. M. (1993). A study of Ed.D.s, Ph.D.s and ABDs in educational administration:
Dissertation completion, Ed.D. candidates, Ph.D. candidates (Doctoral dissertation,
Boston College, 1993). Dissertation Abstracts International, 54, 2069. 
The Nature of Procrastination 89
*Martin, A. (1999). Etude prospective de la procrastination academique: Le role des illusions
positives, de la perception illusoire du temps et de la motivation. Unpublished master‟s
thesis, Université Laval, Quebec, Canada.
*Martin, T. R., Flett, G. L., Hewitt, P. L., Krames, L., & Szanto, G. (1996). Personality
correlates of depression and health symptoms: A test of a self-regulation model. Journal
of Research in Personality, 30, 264-277.
Mayers, A. N. (1946). Anxiety and the group. Journal of Nervous and Mental Disease, 103, 130-
136.
Mazur, J. E. (1996). Procrastination by pigeons: Preferences for larger, more delayed work
requirements. Journal of the Experimental Analysis of Behavior, 65, 159-171.
Mazur, J. E. (1998). Procrastination by pigeons with fixed-interval response requirements.
Journal of the Experimental Analysis of Behavior, 69, 185-197.
McCown, W., Johnson, J., & Petzel, T. (1989). Procrastination, a principal components analysis.
Personality and Individual Differences, 10, 197-202.
*McCown, W., Petzel, T., & Rupert, P. (1987). An experimental study of some hypothesized
behaviors and personality variables of college student procrastinators. Personality and
Individual Differences, 8, 781-786.
McCrae, R. R., (1996). Social consequences of experiential openness, Psychological Bulletin,
120, 323-337
*McKean, K. J. (1994). Using multiple risk factors to assess the behavioral, cognitive, and
affective effects of learned helplessness. Journal of Psychology, 128, 177-183.
The Nature of Procrastination 90
*Mehrabian, A. (2000). Beyond IQ: Broad-based measurement of individual success potential or
“emotional intelligence.” Genetic, Social, and General Psychology Monographs, 126,
133-239.
Metcalfe, J., & Mischel, W. (1999). A hot/cool-system analysis of delay of gratification:
Dynamics of willpower. Psychological Review, 106, 3-19.
*Micek, L. (1982). Nĕkteré problémy autoregulace volních procescü u vysokoškolákü z hlediska
upenvĕneí jeejcicj duševeního zdravi [Some problems of self-autoregulation of volitional
processes in university students from the point of view of their mental health]. Sbornik
Praci Filosoficke Fakulty Brnenske University, 31, 51-70.
Milgram, N. A. (1992). El retraso: Una enfermedad de los tempos modernos [Procrastination: A
malady of modern time]. Boletin de Psicologia, 35, 83-102.
*Milgram, N. A., Batori, G., & Mowrer, D. (1993). Correlates of academic procrastination.
Journal of School Psychology, 31, 487-500.
*Milgram, N. A., Gehrman, T., & Keinan, G. (1992). Procrastination and emotional upset: A
typological model. Personality and Individual Differences, 13, 1307-1313.
*Milgram, N., Marshevsky, S., & Sadeh, C. (1995). Correlates of academic procrastination:
Discomfort, task aversiveness, and task capability. Journal of Psychology, 129, 145-155.
*Milgram, N., Mey-Tal, G., & Levison, Y. (1998). Procrastination, generalized or specific, in
college students and their parents. Personality and Individual Differences, 25, 297-316.
*Milgram, N., & Naaman, N. (1996). Typology in procrastination. Personality and Individual
Differences, 20, 679-683.
*Milgram, N. A., Sroloff, B., & Rosenbaum, M. (1988). The procrastination of everyday life.
Journal of Research in Personality, 22, 197-212.
The Nature of Procrastination 91
*Milgram, N., & Tenne, R. (2000). Personality correlates of decisional and task avoidant
procrastination. European Journal of Personality, 14, 141-156.
*Milgram, N., & Toubiana, Y. (1999). Academic anxiety, academic procrastination, and parental
involvement in students and their parents. British Journal of Educational Psychology, 69,
345-361.
Mischel, W. (1996). From good intentions to willpower. In P. M. Gollwitzer & J. A. Bargh
(Eds.), The psychology of action: Linking cognition and motivation to behavior (pp. 197-
218). New York: Guilford Press.
Mischel, W., Shoda, Y., & Rodriguez, M. L. (1989). Delay of gratification in children. Science,
244, 933-938.
Mitchell, T. (1997). Matching motivational strategies with organizational contexts. In L. L.
Cummings & B. M. Staw (Eds.), Research in organizational behavior (Vol. 19, pp. 57-
149): Greenwich, CT: JAI Press.
*Moon, S. M., & Illingworth, A. J. (2005a). Exploring the dynamic nature of procrastination: A
latent growth curve analysis of academic procrastination. Personality and Individual
Differences, 38, 297-309.
*Moon, S. M., & Illingworth, A. J (2005b). [Correlations of procrastination with the big five
personality traits]. Unpublished raw data.
Morris, C. D., Menashe, V. D., Anderson, P. H., Malinow, M. R., & Illingworth, D. R. (1990).
Community cholesterol screening: medical follow-up in subjects identified with high
plasma cholesterol levels. Preventative Medicine, 19, 493-501.
Mulry, G., Fleming, R., & Gottschalk, A. C. (1994). Psychological reactance and brief treatment
of academic procrastination. Journal of College Student Psychotherapy, 9, 41-56.
The Nature of Procrastination 92
Murray, H. A. (1938). Explorations in personality. New York: Oxford University Press.
*Nadeau, M.-F., Senecal, C., & Guay, F. (2003). The determinants of academic procrastination:
A mediational model of the family context and processes of the self. Canadian Journal of
Behavioural Science, 35(2), 97-110.
*Natale, B. (2001). Zeitmanagement-probleme: Eine folge von time discounting? [Time
management problems: A consequence of time discounting?]. Unpublished doctoral
dissertation, Philipps-University of Marburg, Germany.
*O'Brien, W. K. (2002). Applying the transtheoretical model to academic procrastination.
Unpublished doctoral dissertation, University of Houston.
O‟Donoghue, T., & Rabin, M. (1999). Incentives for procrastinators. Quarterly Journal of
Economics, 114, 769-816.
Oettingen, G. (1996). Positive fantasy and motivation. In P. M. Gollwitzer & J. A. Bargh (Eds.),
The psychology of action: Linking cognition and motivation to behavior (pp. 236-259).
New York: Guilford Press.
*Onwuegbuzie, A. J. (2000a). Academic procrastinators and perfectionistic tendencies among
graduate students. Journal of Social Behavior and Personality, 15, 103-109.
*Onwuegbuzie, A. J. (2000b, April). I'll begin my statistics assignment tomorrow: The
relationship between statistics anxiety and academic procrastination. Paper presented at
the Annual Conference of the American Educational Research Association, New Orleans.
*Onwuegbuzie, A. J., & Jiao, Q. G. (2000). I'll go to the library later: The relationship between
academic procrastination and library anxiety. College and Research Libraries, 61, 45-54.
The Nature of Procrastination 93
*Orellana-Damacela, L. E., Tindale, R. S., & Suárez-Balcázar, Y. (2000). Decisional and
behavioral procrastination: How they relate to self-discrepancies. Journal of Social
Behavior and Personality, 15, 225-238.
Ostaszewski, P. (1996). The relation between temperament and rate of temporal discounting.
European Journal of Personality, 10, 161-172.
Ostaszewski, P. (1997). Temperament and the discounting of delayed and probabilistic rewards:
Conjoining European and American psychological traditions. European Psychologist, 2,
35-43.
Ostroff, C. (1993). Comparing correlations based on individual-level and aggregated data.
Journal of Applied Psychology, 78, 569-582.
Ottens, A. J. (1982). A guaranteed scheduling technique to manage students' procrastination.
College Student Journal, 16, 371-376.
*Owens, A. M., & Newbegin, I. (1997). Procrastination in high school achievement: A causal
structural model. Journal of Social Behavior and Personality, 12, 869-887.
Peterson, C., Colvin, D., & Lin, E. H. (1992). Explanatory style and helplessness. Social
Behavior and Personality, 20, 1-13.
*Peterson, K. E. (1987). Relationships among measures of writer's block, writing anxiety, and
procrastination (Doctoral dissertation, Ohio State University, 1987). Dissertation
Abstracts International, 48, 1505.
Petry, N. M. (2001). Pathological gamblers, with and without substance abuse disorders,
discount delayed rewards at high rates. Journal of Abnormal Psychology, 110, 482-487. 
The Nature of Procrastination 94
*Pfister, T. L. (2002). The effects of self-monitoring on academic procrastination, self-efficacy
and achievement. Unpublished doctoral dissertation, Florida State University,
Tallahassee.
Pickering, A. D., Corr, P. J., Powell, J. H., Kumari, V., Thornton, J. C., & Gray, J. A. (1997).
Individual differences in reactions to reinforcing stimuli are neither black nor white: To
what extent are they Gray? In H. Nyborg (Ed.), The scientific study of human nature:
Tribute to Hans J. Eysenck at eighty (pp. 36-67). Oxford: Pergamon/Elsevier Science.
Potts, T. J. (1987). Predicting procrastination on academic tasks with self-report personality
measures. (Doctoral dissertation, Hofstra University, 1987). Dissertation Abstracts
International, 48, 1543.
Procrastination Research Group (2005). PRG quick poll. Retrieved March 14, 2006, from
http://pollwizard.com/poll.cgi?action=results&poll=390
Procrastination Research Group (2006). References for books, journal articles and theses about
procrastination. Retrieved March 14, 2006, from
http://www.carleton.ca/~tpychyl/prg/research/research_complete_biblio.html
*Prohaska, V., Morrill, P., Atiles, I., & Perez, A. (2000). Academic procrastination by
nontraditional students. Journal of Social Behavior and Personality, 15, 125-134.
Puffer, S. M. (1989). Task-completion schedules. Determinants and consequences for
performance. Human Relations, 42, 937-955.
*Pullen, F. J. (2003). Perfectionism, procrastination, and other self-reported barriers to
completing the doctoral dissertation. Unpublished doctoral dissertation, University of
Iowa, Iowa City.
The Nature of Procrastination 95
*Pychyl, T. A. (1995). Personal projects, subjective well-being and the lives of doctoral students
(goal oriented). Unpublished doctoral dissertation, Carleton University, Ottawa, Ontario,
Canada.
*Pychyl, T. A., Coplan, R. J., & Reid, P. A. (2002). Parenting and procrastination: Gender
differences in the relations between procrastination, parenting style and self-worth in
early adolescence. Personality and Individual Differences, 33, 271-285.
*Pychyl, T. A., Lee, J. M., Thibodeau, R., & Blunt, A. (2000). Five days of emotion: An
experience sampling study of undergraduate student procrastination. Journal of Social
Behavior and Personality, 15, 239-254.
Quarton, J. P. (1992). How do adults experience chronic procrastination? A field guide for
visitors from outer space (Doctoral dissertation, The Union Institute, 1993). Dissertation
Abstracts International, 53, 3789.
Rachlin, H. (1990). Why do people gamble and keep gambling despite heavy losses?
Psychological Science, 1, 294-297.
Rachlin, H. (2000). The science of self-control. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
*Rawlins, D. R. (1995). A study of academic procrastination in middle-school-aged children
(Doctoral dissertation, University of New York, 1995). Dissertation Abstracts
International, 56, 1708.
Read, D. (2001). Intrapersonal dilemmas. Human Relations, 54, 1093-1117.
*Reasinger, R., & Brownlow, S. (1996, March). Putting off until tomorrow what is better done
today: Academic procrastination as a function of motivation toward college work. Paper
presented at the Annual meeting of the Southeastern Psychological Association, Norfolk,
VA.
The Nature of Procrastination 96
Revelle, W. (1997). Extraversion and impulsivity: The lost dimension? In H. Nyborg (Ed.), The
scientific study of human nature: Tribute to Hans J. Eysenck at eighty (pp. 189-212).
Oxford: Pergamon/Elsevier Science.
Richards, J. B., Zhang, L., Mitchell, S. H., & de Wit, H. (1999). Delay or probability discounting
in a model of impulsive behavior: Effect of alcohol. Journal of Experimental Analysis of
Behavior, 71, 121-143.
Roberts, B. W., Chernyshenko, O. S., Stark, S., & Goldberg, L. R. (2005). The structure of
conscientiousness: An empirical investigation based on seven major personality
questionnaires. Personnel Psychology, 58, 103-139.
Roberts, B. W., Walton, K. E., & Viechtbauer, W. (2006). Patterns of mean-level change in
personality traits across the life course: A meta-analysis of longitudinal studies
Psychological Bulletin, 132, 1-25.
Robinson, T. E., & Berridge, K. C. (2003) Addiction. Annual Review of Psychology, 54, 25-53.
*Roig, M., & DeTommaso, L. (1995). Are college cheating and plagiarism related to academic
procrastination? Psychological Reports, 77, 691-698.
*Rothblum, E. D., Solomon, L. J., & Murakami, J. (1986). Affective, cognitive, and behavioral
differences between high and low procrastinators. Journal of Counseling Psychology, 33,
387-394.
Ruiz-Caballero, J. A, & Bermudez, J. (1995). Neuroticism, mood, and retrieval of negative
personal memories. Journal of General Psychology, 122, 29-35.
*Saddler, C. D., & Buley, J. (1999). Predictors of academic procrastination in college students.
Psychological Reports, 84, 686-688.
The Nature of Procrastination 97
*Saddler, C. D., & Sacks, L. A. (1993). Multidimensional perfectionism and academic
procrastination: Relationships with depression in university students. Psychological
Reports, 73, 863-871.
Saklofske, D. F., Kelly, I. W, & Janzen, B. L. (1995). Neuroticism, depression, and depression
proneness. Personality and Individual Differences, 18, 27-31.
Sarason, I. G., Sarason, B. R., & Pierce, G. R. (1990). Anxiety, cognitive interference, and
performance. Journal of Social Behavior and Personality, 5, 1-18.
*Sarmany, S. I. (1999). Procrastination, need for cognition and sensation seeking. Studia
Psychologica, 41, 73-85.
*Sayers, C. R. (2003). The psychological implications of procrastination, anxiety, perfectionism,
and lowered aspirations in college graduate students. Unpublished doctoral dissertation,
Cleveland State University, Ohio.
*Scher, S. J., & Ferrari, J. R. (2000). The recall of completed and noncompleted tasks through
daily logs to measure procrastination. Journal of Social Behavior and Personality, 15,
255-266.
*Scher, S. J., & Osterman, N. M. (2002). Procrastination, conscientiousness, anxiety, and goals:
Exploring the measurement and correlates of procrastination among school-aged
children. Psychology in Schools, 39, 385-398.
Schlenker, B. R., & Weigold, M. F. (1990). Self-consciousness and self-presentation: Being
autonomous versus appearing autonomous. Journal of Personality and Social
Psychology, 59, 820-828
The Nature of Procrastination 98
*Schouwenburg, H. C. (1991). De diagnostiek van procrastinatie bij studenten [Diagnosing
procrastination in students]. Nederlands Tijdschrift voor de Psychologie en Haar
Grensgebieden, 46, 379-385.
*Schouwenburg, H. C. (1992). Procrastinators and fear of failure: An exploration of reasons for
procrastination. European Journal of Personality, 6, 225-236.
*Schouwenburg, H. C. (1993). Procrastinerende en faalangstige studenten in termen van
persoonsbeschrijvende adjectieven [Procrastinating and failure-fearing students in terms
of personality-describing adjectives]. Nederlands Tijdschrift voor de Psychologie en
Haar Grensgebieden, 48, 43-44.
*Schouwenburg, H. C. (1995). Academic procrastination: Theoretical notions, measurement, and
research. In J. R. Ferrari & J. L. Johnson (Eds.), Procrastination and task avoidance:
Theory, research, and treatment (pp. 71-96). New York: Plenum Press.
*Schouwenburg, H. C. (1995, October 10). Procrastination in academic settings: General
introduction. Message posted to Oblov electronic mailing list.
Schouwenburg, H. C. (2004). Academic procrastination: Theoretical notions, measurement, and
research. In H. C. Schouwenburg, C. H. Lay, T. A. Pychyl, & J. R.Ferrari (Eds.),
Counseling the procrastinator in academic settings (pp. 3-17). Washington, DC:
American Psychological Association.
Schouwenburg, H. C., & Groenewoud, J. T. (1997). Studieplanning: Ein werkboek voor
studenten [Study planning: A workbook for students]. Groningen: Wolters-Noordhoff.
*Schouwenburg, H. C., & Groenewoud, J. T. (2001). Study motivation under social temptation;
effects of trait procrastination. Personality and Individual Differences, 30, 229-240.
The Nature of Procrastination 99
*Schouwenburg, H. C., & Lay, C. H. (1995). Trait procrastination and the Big Five factors of
personality. Personality and Individual Differences, 18, 481-490.
Schouwenburg, H. C., Lay, C. H., Pychyl, T. A., & Ferrari, J. R. (2004). Counseling the
procrastinator in academic settings. Washington, DC: American Psychological
Association.
Schwartz, B. (1989). Psychology of learning and behavior (3rd ed.). New York: Norton.
*Schwarzer, R., & Jerusalem, M. (1999). Skalen zur Erfassung von Lehrer- und
Schülermerkmalen [Scales for the collection of teacher and pupil characteristics].
Retrieved September 27, 2002, from http://www.fuberlin.de/gesund/skalen/Language_Selection/Turkish/General_Perceived_SelfEfficac/Startpage_English/startpage_english.htm
*Schwarzer, R., & Jerusalem, M. (2001). Skalen zur Erfassung von Lehrer- und
Schülermerkmalen: Dokumentation der psychometrischen Verfahren im Rahmen der
Wissenschaftlichen Begleitung des Modellversuchs Selbstwirksame Schulen [Scales to
measure the characteristics of teachers and students: Documentation of the psychometric
scales used in the research program accompanying the model project Self-efficient
Schools]. Retrieved March 8, 2003, from http://www.fuberlin.de/gesund/schulen/skalen.htm.
*Senécal, C., & Guay, F. (2000). Procrastination in job-seeking: An analysis of motivational
processes and feelings of hopelessness. Journal of Social Behavior and Personality, 15,
267-282.
*Senécal, C., Julien, E., & Guay, F. (2003). Role conflict and academic procrastination: A selfdetermination perspective. European Journal of Social Psychology, 33, 135-145.
The Nature of Procrastination100
*Senécal, C., Koestner, R., & Vallerand, R. J. (1995). Self-regulation and academic
procrastination. Journal of Social Psychology, 135, 607-619.
*Senécal, C., Lavoie, K., & Koestner, R. (1997). Trait and situational factors in procrastination:
An interactional model. Journal of Social Behavior and Personality, 12, 889-903.
Shoham-Salomon, V., Avner, R., & Neeman, R. (1989). You're changed if you do and changed
if you don't: Mechanisms underlying paradoxical interventions. Journal of Consulting
and Clinical Psychology, 57, 590-598.
Sigall, H., Kruglanski, A., & Fyock, J. (2000). Wishful thinking and procrastination. Journal of
Social Behavior and Personality, 15, 283-296.
Silver, M. (1974). Procrastination. Centerpoint, 1, 49-54.
Silver, M., & Sabini, J. (1981). Procrastinating. Journal for the Theory of Social Behavior, 11,
207-221.
Simon, H. A. (1994). The bottleneck of attention: Connecting thought with motivation. In W. D.
Spaulding (Ed.), Nebraska symposium in motivation: Vol. 41. Integrative views of
motivation, cognition, and emotion (pp. 1-21). Lincoln, NE: University of Nebraska
Press.
*Sirois, F. M. (2004a). Procrastination and counter-factual thinking: Avoiding what might have
been. British Journal of Social Psychology, 43, 269-286.
*Sirois, F. M. (2004b). Procrastination and intentions to perform health behaviors: The role of
self-efficacy and the consideration of future consequences. Personality and Individual
Differences, 37, 115-128.
The Nature of Procrastination101
*Sirois, F. M., Melia-Gordon, M. L., & Pychyl, T. A. (2003). 'I'll look after my health, later": An
investigation of procrastination and health. Personality and Individual Differences, 35,
1167-1184.
*Sirois, F. M., & Pychyl, T. A. (2002, August). Academic procrastination: Costs to health and
well-being. Paper presented at the annual meeting of the American Psychological
Association, Chicago, IL.
Sivy, M. (2000). On borrowed time. Time Europe, 155(2), 50.
*Skidmore, R. L. (2002). “Why can't I seem to get anything done?” Procrastination and daily
hassles as predictors of student performance and engagement in a college self-paced
introductory psychology course. The relation to motivational orientation and learning
strategies. Unpublished doctoral dissertation, University of Kentucky, Lexington.
*Skiffington, S. T. (1982). The development and validation of a self-report measure of general
procrastination: The Time Utilization Inventory (Doctoral dissertation, University of
Georgia, 1982). Dissertation Abstracts International, 43, 2003.
Skoyles, J. R., & Sagan, D. (2002). Up from dragons. New York: McGraw-Hill.
Slaney, R. B., Ashby, J. S., & Trippi, J. (1995). Perfectionism: Its measurement and career
relevance. Journal of Career Assessment, 3, 279-297.
Slaney, R. B., Rice, K. G., & Ashby, J. S (2002). A programmatic approach to measuring
perfectionism: The Almost Perfect Scales. In G. L. Flett & P. L. Hewitt (Eds.),
Perfectionism: Theory, research, and treatment (pp. 63-88). Washington, DC: American
Psychological Association.
*Smith, T. (1994). Personality correlates of learning and study activities in college students.
Unpublished master‟s thesis, University of Toronto, Ontario, Canada.
The Nature of Procrastination102
Smith, T. W., Snyder, C. R, & Handelsman, M. M. (1982). On the self-serving function of an
academic wooden leg: Test anxiety as a self-handicapping strategy. Journal of
Personality and Social Psychology, 42, 314-321.
*Solomon, L. J., & Rothblum, E. D. (1984). Academic procrastination: Frequency and cognitivebehavioral correlates. Journal of Counseling Psychology, 31, 503-509.
*Somers, M. M. (1992). Getting around to it, eventually: Work attitudes and behaviours of
student procrastinators. Unpublished doctoral dissertation, University of Waterloo,
Ontario, Canada.
Sommer, W. G. (1990). Procrastination and cramming: How adept students ace the system.
Journal of American College Health, 39, 5-10.
Soutullo, C. A., McElroy, S. L., & Goldsmith, R. J. (1998). Cravings and irresistible impulses:
Similarities between addictions and impulse control disorders. Psychiatric Annals, 28,
592-600.
*Specter, M. H., & Ferrari, J. R. (2000). Time orientations of procrastinators: Focusing on the
past, present, or future? Journal of Social Behavior and Personality, 15, 197-202.
Spence, J. T., & Helmreich, R. L. (1983). Achievement-related motives and behavior. In J. T.
Spence (Ed.), Achievement and achievement motives: Psychological and sociological
approaches (pp. 10-74). San Francisco: Freeman.
Staats, A. W. (1999). Unifying psychology requires new infrastructure, theory, method, and a
research agenda. Review of General Psychology, 3, 3-13.
*Stainton, M. (1993). The development and application of a procrastinatory cognitions
inventory. Unpublished master‟s thesis, York University, Toronto, Ontario, Canada.
The Nature of Procrastination103
*Stainton, M., Lay, C. H., & Flett, G. L. (2000). Trait procrastinators and behavior/trait-specific
cognitions. Journal of Social Behavior and Personality, 15, 297-312.
Stanhope, P. D. (1749/1968). In Bartlett’s familiar quotations (14th ed.). Boston: Little, Brown.
*Steel, P. (2002a). [Correlations of procrastination with the big five personality traits].
Unpublished raw data.
*Steel, P. (2002b). The measurement and nature of procrastination. Unpublished doctoral
dissertation, University of Minnesota, Minneapolis.
*Steel, P. (2003). [Correlations of procrastination with the Big Five personality traits].
Unpublished raw data.
*Steel, P., Brothen, T., & Wambach, C. (2001). Procrastination and personality, performance,
and mood. Personality and Individual Differences, 30, 95-106.
Steel, P., & Kammeyer-Mueller, J. D. (2002). Comparing meta-analytic moderator estimation
techniques under realistic conditions. Journal of Applied Psychology, 87, 96-111.
Steel, P., & König, C. J. (in press). Integrating theories of motivation. Academy of Management
Review.
Steel, P., & Ones, D. (2002). Personality and happiness: A national level of analysis. Journal of
Personality and Social Psychology, 83, 767-781.
*Stöber, J. (1998). The Frost Multidimensional Perfectionism Scale revisited: More perfect with
four (instead of six) dimensions. Personality and Individual Differences, 24, 481-491.
*Stöber, J., & Joormann, J. (2001). Worry, procrastination, and perfectionism: Differentiating
amount of worry, pathological worry, anxiety, and depression. Cognitive Therapy and
Research, 25, 49-60.
The Nature of Procrastination104
Stone, D. A. (2000). The neuropsychological correlates of severe academic procrastination.
Unpublished doctoral dissertation, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor.
Stromer, R., McComas, J. J., & Rehfeldt, R. A. (2000). Designing interventions that include
delayed reinforcement: Implications of recent laboratory research. Journal of Applied
Behavior Analysis, 33, 359-371.
*Strong, S. R., Wambach, C. A., Lopez, F. G., & Cooper, R. K. (1979). Motivational and
equipping function of interpretation in counseling. Journal of Counseling Psychology, 26,
98-109.
Strongman, K. T., & Burt, C. D. B. (2000). Taking breaks from work: An exploratory inquiry.
Journal of Psychology, 134, 229-242.
*Sub, A., & Prabha, C. (2003). Academic performance in relation to perfectionism, test
procrastination, and test anxiety of high school children. Psychological Studies, 48(3),
77-81.
Tabachnick, B. G. & Fidell, L. S. (1989). Using multivariate statistics (2nd ed.). New York:
HarperCollins.
Terry, D. J., Tonge, L., & Callan, V. J. (1995). Employee adjustment to stress: The role of
coping resources, situational factors, and coping responses. Anxiety, Stress, and Coping,
An International Journal, 8, 1-24.
*Tett, R. P., Henderson, C. M., & Wang, A. Y. (2004). Dimensionality of academic
procrastination: Differential relations with personality traits and a comparison of
procrastination inventories. Unpublished manuscript, University of Tulsa, Arizona.
*Tice, D. M., & Baumeister, R. F. (1997). Longitudinal study of procrastination, performance,
stress, and health: The costs and benefits of dawdling. Psychological Science, 8, 454-458.
The Nature of Procrastination105
Tice, D. M., & Bratslavsky, E. (2000). Giving in to feel good: The place of emotion regulation in
the context of general self-control. Psychological Inquiry, 11, 149-159.
Tice, D. M., Bratslavsky, E., & Baumeister, R. F. (2001). Emotional distress regulation takes
precedence over impulse control: If you feel bad, do it! Journal of Personality and Social
Psychology, 80, 53-67.
*Towers, A., & Flett, R. (2004). Why put it off? Understanding student procrastination over
time. Unpublished manuscript, Massey University, Palmerston North, Australia.
Trope, Y., & Liberman, N. (2003). Temporal construal. Psychological Review, 110, 403-421.
*Tuckman, B. W. (1991). The development and concurrent validity of the Procrastination Scale.
Educational and Psychological Measurement, 51, 473-480.
Tuckman, B. W. (1998). Using tests as an incentive to motivate procrastinators to study. Journal
of Experimental Education, 66, 141-147.
*Tuckman, B. W. (2002, August). Academic procrastinators: Their rationalizations and webcourse performance. Paper presented at the annual meeting of the American
Psychological Association, Chicago.
*Tuckman, B. W., & Abry, D. (1998, August). Developing a motivational model of college
achievement. Paper presented at the annual meeting of the American Psychological
Association, San Francisco.
Twenge, J. (2000). The age of anxiety? The birth cohort change in anxiety and neuroticism,
1952-1993. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 79, 1007-1021
United States Census Bureau (2000). Midyear population, by age and sex. Retrieved January 30,
2003, from http://www.census.gov/main/www/cen2000.html.
The Nature of Procrastination106
VandeWalle, D., Cron, W. L., & Slocum, J. W. Jr. (2001). The role of goal orientation following
performance feedback. Journal of Applied Psychology, 86, 629-640.
*Van Hooft, E. A. J., Born, M. P., Taris, T. W., van der Flier, H., & Blonk, R. W. B. (2005).
Bridging the gap between intentions and behavior: Implementation intentions, action
control, and procrastination. Journal of Vocational Behavior, 66, 238-256.
*Van Eerde, W. (1998). Work motivations and procrastination: Self-set goals and action
avoidance. Unpublished doctoral dissertation, Universitiet van Amsterdam, Netherlands.
Van Eerde, W. (2003). A meta-analytically derived nomological network of procrastination,
Personality and Individual Differences, 35, 1401-1418.
*Vodanovich, S. J., & Rupp, D. E. (1999). Are procrastinators prone to boredom? Social
Behavior and Personality, 27, 11-16.
*Vodanovich, S. J., & Seib, H. M. (1997). Relationship between time structure and
procrastination. Psychological Reports, 80, 211-215.
*Voicu, D. (1992). An examination of parent-child relations and psychological adjustment in
relation to trait procrastination. Unpublished master‟s thesis, York University, Toronto,
Ontario, Canada.
Wadden, T. A., Brownell, K. D., & Foster, G. D. (2002). Obesity: Responding to the global
epidemic. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 70, 510-525.
*Walsh, J. J., & Ugumba-Agwunobi, G. (2002). Individual differences in statistics anxiety: The
roles of perfectionism, procrastination and trait anxiety. Personality and Individual
Differences, 33, 239-251.
*Watson, D. C. (2001). Procrastination and the five-factor model: A facet level analysis.
Personality and Individual Differences, 30, 149-158.
The Nature of Procrastination107
Watson, D., & Clark, L. A. (1997). Extraversion and its positive emotional core. In R. Hogan, J.
Johnson, & S. Briggs (Eds.), Handbook of personality psychology (pp. 767-793). San
Diego, CA: Academic Press.
*Wedeman, S. C. (1985). Procrastination: An inquiry into its etiology and phenomenology.
Unpublished doctoral dissertation, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia.
*Wernicke, R. A. (1999). Mediational tests of the relationship between perfectionism and
procrastination (Master‟s dissertation, The American University, 1999). Masters
Abstracts International, 37, 1982.
*Wesley, J. C. (1994). Effects of ability, high school achievement, and procrastinatory behavior
on college performance. Educational and Psychological Measurement, 54, 404-408.
Wesp, R. (1986). Reducing procrastination through required course involvement. Teaching of
Psychology, 13, 128-130.
Wessman, A. E. (1973). Personality and the subjective experience of time. Journal of
Personality Assessment, 37, 103-114.
White, V. M., Wearing, A. J. & Hill, D. J. (1994). Is the conflict model of decision making
applicable to the decision to be screened for cervical cancer? A field study. Journal of
Behavioral Decision Making, 7, 57–72.
Whitener, E. M. (1990). Confusion of confidence intervals and credibility intervals in metaanalysis. Journal of Applied Psychology, 75, 315-321.
Widiger, T. A., & Trull, T. J. (1997). Assessment of the five-factor model of personality. Journal
of Personality Assessment, 68, 228-250.
*Wolters, C. A. (2003). Understanding procrastination from a self-regulated learning
perspective. Journal of Educational Psychology, 95, 179-187.
The Nature of Procrastination108
Wortman, P. M. (1994). Judging research quality. In H. Cooper, & L. V. Hedges (Eds.), The
handbook of research synthesis (pp. 97-109). New York: Russell Sage Foundation.
Wright, P. M., Hollenbeck, J. R., Wolf, S., & McMahan, G. (1995). The effects of varying goal
difficulty operationalizations on goal setting outcomes and processes. Organizational
Behavior and Human Decision Processes, 61, 28-43.
*Zamanpour, H. (2000). The mediational roles of performance-avoidance goals pursuit and
procrastination in the hierarchical model of achievement motivation. Unpublished
master‟s thesis, Carleton University, Ottawa, Ontario, Canada.
Zeidner, M., Boekaerts, M., & Pintrich, P. R. (2000). Self-regulation: Directions and challenges
for future research. In M. Boekaerts, P. R. Pintrich, & M. Zeidner (Eds.), Handbook of
self-regulation (pp. 749-768). New York: Academic Press.
Ziesat, H. A., Rosenthal, T. L., & White, G. M. (1978). Behavioral self-control in treating
procrastination of studying. Psychological Reports, 42, 59-69.
The Nature of Procrastination109
Author Note
Piers Steel, Human Resources and Organizational Dynamics, University of Calgary.
I would like to sincerely thank Henri Schouwenburg for his enthusiasm in this endeavor
as well as his willingness to share and translate his considerable research on procrastination.
Correspondence concerning this article should be addressed to Piers Steel, 444 Scurfield
Hall, 2500 University Drive N.W., University of Calgary, Calgary, Alberta, Canada T2N 1N4.
Email: Piers.Steel@Haskayne.UCalgary.ca.
The Nature of Procrastination110
Footnotes
1
For example, a reasonably close contemporary of Reverend Walker was Jonathan
Edwards (1703-1758) who wrote the sermon Procrastination, or The Sin and Folly of Depending
on Future Time (Hickman, 1998). Also, interestingly enough, the topic has continued to be of
religious significance up to present day (see http://www.sermoncentral.com/).
2
The equation for calculating the heritability coefficient is simply the correlation for
identical twins MINUS the correlation for fraternal twins then MULTIPIED by two. In this case
it is: (.24 -.13) x 2 or 22%.
3Although this is the predominant opinion, others argue that the depiction is too simple.
As McCown, Petzel and Rupert (1987) discuss, it is equally plausible that neurotics would be
extremely prompt so as to remove the dreaded task as quickly as possible. Also, the
consequences of facing a deadline unprepared may be so terrible that anxious people work
exceedingly hard to avoid ever confronting such circumstances.
4
For further integration of Temporal Motivation Theory (i.e., an expectancy-value type
theory) within a control theory framework, see Vancouver and Day (2005).
5Ottens (1982) makes this observation early on, noting that, “Procrastinators perceive
task situations in such ways so as to exacerbate their aversiveness” (p. 371).
6Of note, Rawlins (1995) found that this was a more popular reason for very young
adolescents, with 26% highly endorsing this item. Also, Galué (1990) and Aldarando (1993)
extracted procrastination dimensions similar to rebellion, that is “Autonomy” and “PassiveAggressive” respectively.
7Unfortunately, this study is less than decisive. It operationalized procrastination as delay
in conjunction with negative affect, thus virtually guaranteeing this effect. On the other hand, 
The Nature of Procrastination111
Beswick et al. (1988) report that the “problem” versus “anxiety” versions of their inventory
correlated at .89.
8As one reviewer noted, there is still an additional issue to be resolved. Although
perfectionists do not appear to unduly delay initiating tasks, they may still delay completing
them as they strive to meet their own onerous standards. 
The Nature of Procrastination112
Table 1
Expected Procrastination Relationships with Variables Related to Expectancy, Value, Sensitivity
to Delay, and Delay that Further Validate Temporal Motivation Theory
Construct Theoretical Connection Relationship
Expectancy
Self-Efficacy Represents the belief that one has the capability of
successfully complete a range of tasks.
Negative
Value
Task Aversiveness By definition, unpleasant tasks have low value. Positive
Need for Achievement Helps to create more pleasure in accomplishment. Negative
Boredom Proneness Increases the likelihood that a broad range of life‟s
tasks will be found tedious.
Positive
Sensitivity to Delay ( )
Distractible
All these three variables are empirically related to
sensitivity to delay.
Impulsiveness Positive
Lack of Self-Control
Age Sensitivity to delay tends to decrease with age. Negative
Delay
Timing of Rewards &
Punishment
Emphasizing the focus of past research, delay is
operationalized as the delay for rewards.
Positive
Organized Helps with the creation of proximal goals. Negative
Intention-Action Gap Represents a failure to later act upon intentions. Positive
The Nature of Procrastination113
Table 2
Summary of Procrastination’s Correlational Findings: Task Aversiveness
r - 95% Interval - 95% Interval
Construct K N
r
SDr Confidence Credibility SDρ Confidence Credibility
Task Aversiveness
Task Procrastination 8 938 .40 .13 .30 to .51 .14 to .67 .44 .14 .32 to .55 .15 to .72
Trait Procrastination 10 1,069 .40 .12 .31 to .49 .17 to .63 .46 .14 .36 to .57 .19 to .73
Note. Task procrastination refers to whether anyone would procrastinate about performing a specific task if it was aversive. Trait
procrastination refers to whether procrastinators find more of life‟s tasks (e.g., washing dishes, paying bills) aversive. 
The Nature of Procrastination114
Table 3
Summary of Procrastination’s Correlational Findings: Neuroticism &Related Traits
r - 95% Interval - 95% Interval
Construct K N
r
SDr Confidence Credibility SDρ Confidence Credibility
Neuroticism 59 10,720 .24 .07 .21 to .26 .10 to .37 .28 .08 .25 to .31 .12 to .44
Impulsive Unrelated 10 2,366 .16 .00 .14 to .18 .16 to .16 .19 .00 .17 to .22 .19 to .19
Impulsive Related 10 1,911 .33 .04 .28 to .37 .26 to .40 .37 .06 .32 to .42 .26 to .48
All Irrational Beliefs 71 13,137 .17 .10 .14 to .20 -.03 to .36 .20 .12 .17 to .24 -.03 to .44
Irrational Beliefs 14 2,384 .27 .11 .20 to .34 .04 to .49 .35 .14 .26 to .44 .08 to .62
Fear of Failure a
57 10,785 .18 .08 .15 to .20 .02 to .33 .21 .10 .18 to .24 .02 to .40
Perfectionism b
24 3,884 -.03 .11 -.09 to .02 -.26 to .19 -.04 .14 -.11 to .03 -.31 to .23
Self-Efficacy 39 6,994 -.38 .09 -.42 to -.34 -.57 to -.19 -.46 .12 -.51 to -.42 -.70 to -.22
Self-Esteem 33 5,748 -.27 .06 -.31 to -.24 -.39 to -.16 -.32 .07 -.36 to -.28 -.46 to -.19
Self-Handicapping 16 2,784 .46 .09 .40 to .51 .27 to .64 .61 .13 .54 to .68 .35 to .87
Depression 56 10,728 .28 .08 .26 to .31 .12 to .45 .34 .10 .31 to .38 .14 to .54
The Nature of Procrastination115
a
Includes: Fear of Failure, Evaluation Anxiety, Social Perfectionism, Self-Consciousness.
b Includes: Self and Other Perfectionism.
The Nature of Procrastination116
Table 4
Summary of Procrastination’s Correlational Findings: Openness to Experience, Agreeableness, & Extraversion
r - 95% Interval - 95% Interval
Construct K N
r
SDr Confidence Credibility SDρ Confidence Credibility
Openness to Experience: Intelligence/Aptitude
Openness to Exp. 16 3,612 .03 .08 -.02 to .08 -.14 to .20 .04 .10 -.03 to .10 -.16 to .24
Intelligence/Aptitude 14 2,151 .03 .07 -.03 to .09 -.11 to .17 .03 .08 -.03 to .10 -.13 to .20
Agreeableness
Agreeableness 24 5,001 -.12 .06 -.08 to -.15 -.01 to -.23 -.14 .07 -.19 to -.10 -.28 to -.01
Extraversion
Extraversion 27 5,032 -.12 .05 -.15 to -.09 -.21 to -.03 -.14 .05 -.18 to -.10 -.25 to -.04
Extraversion 18 3,951 -.11 .04 -.14 to -.07 -.19 to -.03 -.13 .04 -.17 to -.08 -.21 to -.04
Positive Affect 12 1,934 -.17 .05 -.23 to -.12 -.27 to -.07 -.21 .06 -.27 to -.15 -.33 to -.08
Impulsiveness 22 4,005 .41 .10 .37 to .46 .23 to .60 .52 .11 .46 to .58 .30 to .75
Sensation Seeking 11 2,055 .17 .12 .09 to .25 -.07 to .41 .21 .15 .11 to .32 -.08 to .51
Boredom Proneness 3 408 .39 .11 .25 to .54 .18 to .61 .51 .14 .32 to .69 .24 to .77
The Nature of Procrastination117
Table 5
Summary of Procrastination’s Correlational Findings: Conscientiousness & Intention-Action Gap
r - 95% Interval - 95% Interval
Construct K N
r
SDr Confidence Credibility SDρ Confidence Credibility
Conscientiousness
Conscientiousness 20 4,012 -.62 .05 -.65 to -.60 -.71 to -.53 -.75 .06 -.78 to -.72 -.88 to -.62
Self-Control 21 3,840 -.58 .09 -.62 to -.53 -.76 to -.39 -.73 .14 -.79 to -.68 -1.0 to -.46
Distractibility 13 2,232 .45 .09 .39 to .51 .28 to .62 .59 .11 .51 to .66 .37 to .81
Organization 25 4,757 -.36 .10 -.41 to -.31 -.57 to -.15 -.45 .14 -.51 to -.39 -.73 to -.18
Achievement Motivat. 34 6,171 -.35 .11 -.40 to -.31 -.57 to -.14 -.43 .13 -.48 to -.38 -.69 to -.16
Need for Achiev. 17 3,416 -.44 .11 -.50 to -.38 -.66 to -.22 -.55 .13 -.62 to -.47 -.81 to -.28
Intrinsic Motivation 19 3,299 -.26 .06 -.31 to -.22 -.39 to -.14 -.32 .06 -.37 to -.26 -.44 to -.19
Intention-Action Gap
Dilatory Behavior 16 3,059 .52 .07 .48 to .56 .38 to .66 .64 .08 .59 to .69 .48 to .80
Intention 8 1,017 -.03 .12 -.13 to .08 -.27 to .21 -.03 .14 -.16 to .09 -.32 to .25
Intention-Action Gap 6 533 .29 .00 .22 to .36 .29 to .29 .31 .00 .24 to .38 .31 to .31
The Nature of Procrastination118
Table 6
Summary of Procrastination’s Correlational Findings: Poor Performance & Demographics
r - 95% Interval - 95% Interval
Construct K N
r
SDr Confidence Credibility SDρ Confidence Credibility
Poor Performance
Performance - All 41 7,447 -.19 .09 -.23 to -.16 -.37 to -.01 -.21 .10 -.25 to -.17 -.41 to -.01
GPA 19 4,075 -.16 .07 -.20 to -.12 -.29 to -.03 -.18 .07 -.21 to -.13 -.32 to -.04
Course GPA 10 2.067 -.25 .03 -.30 to -.21 -.32 to -.19 -.28 .03 -.33 to -.23 -.35 to -.21
Final Exam 11 947 -.17 .17 -.29 to -.06 -.50 to .15 -.19 .18 -.31 to -.06 -.54 to .17
Assignments 13 1,973 -.21 .13 -.29 to -.12 -.47 to .06 -.22 .15 -.32 to -.13 -.52 to .07
Demographics
Age - Uncorrected 16 3,248 -.15 .07 -.20 to -.10 -.29 to -.00 -.16 .08 -.21 to -.11 -.32 to .00
Age - Corrected 16 3,248 -.48 .12 -.70 to -.25 -.71 to -.24 -.51 .13 -.75 to -.27 -.77 to -.26
Sex (M=1, F=2) 44 8,756 -.08 .09 -.12 to -.05 -.27 to .10 -.09 .10 -.13 to -.05 -.29 to .11
The Nature of Procrastination119
Figure Captions
Figure 1. Graph of a student‟s utility estimation for socializing versus writing an essay over the
course of a semester.
Figure 2. Preference reversal between spending and saving as a function of time remaining to
cash bonus and hyperbolic discounting.
The Nature of Procrastination120
The Nature of Procrastination121